Letters





of





Johan O. Smith





License


	 		This e-Book is licensed to:



		Hans-Willem van der Waal

		jwh.vd.waal@filternet.nl

		Church: Rotterdam



		Downloaded from Brunstad Portal: 12/25/2015



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag





Colophon




	LETTERS



	of



	Johan O. Smith





		 		Translated from the Norwegian

		Original title: Johan O. Smiths Etterlatte brev

		First published in 1949



		English Edition: Second Edition 1999



		e-Book version: 2011 (revision: 25-3-2011)

		ISBN 978-82-8253-020-0 (ePub format)



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag

		P.O. Box 900

		3168 Melsomvik

		Norway



		www.ssfnett.no

		www.brunstad.org





Copyright and terms of use




Copyright



			 		© This material is protected by the copyright law. Reproduction and/or making the material publicly available, is prohibited without the prior written consent of Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc., P.O. Box 2846, Winnipeg, MB Canada R3C 4B4, if not as the result of invariable established law. Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, P.B. 900, Brunstad, N-3168 Melsomvik, Norway [including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc.]

		(See www.ssfnett.no and www.brunstad.org)





Terms of use



		This e-Book is licensed only for personal use and can thus not be resold or given to other people. 		If you want others to acquire the book, then you can refer them to 		 www.brunstadshop.org. If you read this book and have not purchased this e-Book itself, then you should go to www.brunstadshop.org and buy your own copy.



		Thank you for respecting these terms of use.





Foreword



My father, Johan Oscar Smith, was born in Fredrikstad, Norway, on October 11, 1871. His parents were believers. At the age of 15 he went to sea, and in 1889 he joined the Norwegian Navy, where he served for about 40 years.

In 1898 he was converted, and in 1900 he was baptized in the Holy Spirit. From that time on, the Scriptures became living for him; and since he had a heart and an ear for the voice of truth, he soon partook of God’s wisdom.

These are personal letters, written to his friends in confidence, and they should be read in that light. The individual care with which he worked with people can now bless many through the publication of these letters.

Most of the letters are to his brother, the dentist Aksel Smith, who was nine years younger than he, and who was converted in 1905 and died in 1919 in his home in Drøbak. There the fruit of his blessed work is still growing and developing.

Since my father sought all his life to honor Christ and make himself as inconspicuous as possible, he left no autobiography with stories of his travels, photographs, and accounts of all the things he did. But we have these letters, written to individuals out of zeal for the cause of Christ, and they are a valuable treasure for all like-minded souls, both now and in the future. Here is real food and guidance for those who seek God with all their heart. We are, therefore, extremely thankful that these letters have been preserved by the good Providence of God.

To derive the most possible benefit from this excellent book, which is so rich and full of content, it is advisable not to hurry through it, but rather to dwell and meditate on each letter.

Aksel J. Smith




After 35 years of intimate fellowship with Johan Oscar Smith and as his co-worker, it is my pleasure and my duty to express briefly, clearly, and truthfully my appreciation for him, so that everyone who reads these letters can have a right understanding of the man who wrote them — who he was and is. His one living interest was Christ and the church; to be filled with all God’s fullness, which is in Christ; to render as great a contribution as possible to the task of eradicating all the sin and imperfection that clings to each member of the body of Christ — indeed, to find and do the right and the most perfect thing in every area, both in his personal life and in his ministry, and to crush everything that was of Satan and of man, in order to make room for all the fullness of God.

For this he gave absolutely everything, and for this he watched and prayed. Thus, he was always ready to take his place as a good soldier of Jesus Christ: faithful, true, righteous, selfless, not a respecter of persons, and possessing great contempt for gain and for the honor of man, even though, as a result of this, he came into conflict with, practically speaking, everyone and everything.

Wherever he went and whatever the issue, he found disobedience, unfaithfulness, unbelief, and the work of man among the believers. His faithful heart would not permit him to condone any of this whatsoever.

As a result, he was left out of all the usual religious activity.

It was this exceptional faithfulness and devotion to the Bridegroom of his soul that filled him with the joy and power of the Spirit. And so he chose once and for all to cultivate this intimate fellowship with Christ instead of the favor and honor of the world, even if that meant being alone in this world — which, to begin with, it actually appeared he would be. But he certainly did not end up alone! Glory to God!

I have never seen anyone like him! Never in my whole life have I heard or seen a person who could tell of such a man, whether in this country or any other! God’s great grace, coupled with brother Smith’s exceptionally great faithfulness, has brought forth true followers.

These letters of his certainly will become one of the richest and most unique books of all time. Every person in the whole world could benefit, to a greater or lesser degree, from reading these letters. But how much each one benefits will depend on his attitude and how much grace he receives to respond to what he reads.

Not even as a rare exception — either in his life or his ministry — have I noticed anything bad about him. Honored be his precious memory! All those who have not had the joy of knowing him personally can find in this book some substitute for that loss.

Would that every man on earth had such a leader! May God bless each and every one who receives the grace to read these letters, that he might profit greatly thereby.

Elias Aslaksen





Letters - Part One





Horten, May 19, 1898 — # 1


My dear Family,

Thank you for your letter which I received. At present I’m on board the Thor. Now I can tell you, dear parents, brothers, and sisters, some wonderful news: I am very happy. And why? Because I have received Jesus as my Friend and Brother, and now He is my all in all. Before, I could find no peace anywhere; but now, thanks be to the God of heaven, I find peace everywhere. You will probably be wondering how I got such peace. Well, I’ve understood for a long time that there is no true joy outside of God. It so happened one Sunday afternoon that I met O., who joined the Navy the same day I did, and we went to a Methodist church service. While we sat there, I asked him if he would like to come home with me for supper after the meeting, which he did. During the conversation at home, I was deeply moved. Weeping, we took one another’s hands, and he prayed for us both. I will never forget how I felt. The devil came as usual, of course. But the prayer had done its work, because the following night, during middle-watch on board the Monitor, inside a little gun turret, I began praying. Everything seemed so bleak, but suddenly I was filled with such joy that I felt like my feet were hardly touching the deck when I walked. Only God can make us that happy. May He be praised everywhere!

Things can certainly be difficult for us who are in daily contact with so many people, but God will help us to always stand firm. It certainly felt strange the first time I came off duty and went to the mess hall! I intended to thank God for my food, but I didn’t have the courage. Afterwards, I was reproved in my spirit for this. So at the next opportunity I folded my hands for the first time among the noncommissioned officers and gave thanks. Pray for me that God will preserve me.

Please greet my brothers and sisters, and entreat them to seek the Lord, for only then do we have something to live for.

Sincerely yours,

Johan





Marviken, December 20, 1903 — # 2


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received the book you sent me and have read some of it. I think it would be interesting to take a look here at its contents and its main thesis. My intention isn’t to criticize the book as a gift, but as a book that teaches and builds on another foundation than the one which is laid — Christ Jesus.

The author does his utmost to bring out the good in man. He uses this to fashion and construct a foundation on which a fortress can be built that will withstand and overcome all the evil in man.

“Behold, the man has become like one of Us, to know good and evil,” God says. Knowing the difference between good and evil doesn’t mean that we can be both good and evil at the same time. God knows the difference between good and evil, but, “No one is good but One, that is, God.” Every human being, having come to know good and evil as a result of the Fall, is included in this “no one.”

Romans 3, from verse 10, states: “There is none righteous, no, not one; there is no one who understands; there is none who seeks after God. They have all turned aside; they have together become unprofitable; there is none who does good, no not one. Their throat is an open tomb; with their tongues they have practiced deceit…”

This tells us that there is nothing at all in man that can be used to lay a good foundation upon which something good can be erected.

By nature, man in his entirety is in “death” — far away from the One who is good — namely, God.

Everyone who searches and studies in this human cauldron of death labors in vain. One could easily sacrifice one’s whole life without achieving any results. God has confined all things under sin so that He might have mercy on all. Everything that has been confined under sin has also been created by Him and for Him. What would a man gain from having spent his whole life composing poetry praising the creation and nature — all that is confined under sin — if he never became acquainted with the source of these things, which is God? The world and its lust are passing away; what is gained, then, by praising things that will perish? And why must they perish? Because they are confined under sin.

An evil fountain cannot bring forth good water. None is good but One — that is, God. He is the Fountain from which we must drink, and the water from that Fountain will satisfy us so completely that we will never thirst again. This is something quite different from what is written in the book you sent me: “Be content to have a streak of clear sky above you the moment you die.”

There is nothing good in the natural man; therefore, we must be born again. This new being which is born in us is nothing less than Jesus Christ Himself. He is good because He is one with the Father, and in Christ Jesus nothing is of any value except a new creation. Why is that? Quite simply, because there is nothing good outside of Him.

Man has sinned, and so he must die. If there were anything good in the natural man, that good thing would not have to die. But we see that the entire man does die; not a single part of him remains. The same is also true of someone who believes in Jesus Christ, for not even his flesh and blood will inherit the kingdom of God. The difference is that the one who believes has Jesus Christ dwelling within because of his faith. This new life, which is not visible or tangible, is what remains when our earthly tabernacle is destroyed.

A person must be quite blind or in the deepest sleep if he can’t understand that neither sky nor sea, neither hill nor dale can make us truly happy. There is a longing in the very depths of our heart that yearns for fulfillment, but no inferior creation can satisfy it, for we ourselves are the most excellent of all creatures. Only God can breathe balsam into this deep yearning and completely satisfy it. When we are satisfied like this, we don’t seek satisfaction in rare and beautiful flowers — we are already satisfied.

Only those who are unsatisfied devise the most unbelievable ways of satisfying this deep yearning. They seek satisfaction in beautiful flowers, in the bright, starry skies, and all the rest of nature, but not in the One who created nature.

If man can discover on his own that nature is glorious, shouldn’t he much more readily discover that the One who created nature is infinitely more glorious?

No one honors and admires the works of Ibsen and Bjørnson [famous Norwegian writers] without admiring the authors themselves even more highly. Ja, vi elsker dette landet [the Norwegian national anthem] didn’t receive the Nobel prize; its author did. The national anthem can never achieve more than what it contains, but its author could compose more songs.

Let us conclude from this that the Creator is far more valuable and far more glorious than the creation.

If someone were to praise and idolize a work of art and yet despise and spit on its author, he would be like a blind and ignorant man. All those who praise the creation without knowing the Creator are just the same.

You are young and interested in truth. But you must go deeper and understand what the truth really is so that you don’t allow yourself to be dazzled by a shiny surface, and thus remain there.

If you seek wisdom, seek it from the Source of wisdom, for the wisdom of this world is foolishness to God. All things are created by Jesus Christ and for Jesus Christ; therefore, we can learn everything from Him.

No wisdom can prevail against God’s wisdom. That is why it is the heritage of the servants of the Lord to condemn all their adversaries.

Now is the time of decision. Either you can become so firmly entangled in false theories that it becomes difficult for you to break free, or you can earnestly seek out God’s precious truths, so that you become an irrefutable “professor” in God’s wisdom. The choice is yours, but my heart’s desire for you is that you would choose the latter. Judge for yourself what is right.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, June 25, 1905 — # 3


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your postcard, which was short but good. I see that you’ve said “yes” to Jesus. That’s joyful news indeed! There is joy in heaven and on earth over every sinner that repents. Now, for the first time, you will experience the joy and peace that the world has not been able to give you. Walk straight ahead now on the way of God. Don’t look back like Lot’s wife. Continue to say “yes” to Jesus, for He surpasses all knowledge. Forget what lies behind, and earnestly pursue what lies ahead; hasten toward the treasure which is also laid up in heaven for you. Shun the world in every shape and form, and never covet anything on earth. Pursue those things which are above; the kingdom of heaven consists of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. The Spirit of God leads us into the depths of this kingdom so that our peace is like a river and our righteousness like the waves of the sea.

Never resist God’s Spirit. Always let Him lead and guide you, because He is able to guide you into all truth. Don’t be afraid if you come into fiery trials, for gold is purified in the fire. The fire will not consume you, nor the waters overwhelm you.

Always seek nourishment for your spiritual life. This nourishment consists of life and peace, since the mind of the Spirit is life and peace. Test those who say they are Jews; you may find that they are uncircumcised in heart and ear. He who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the churches. Therefore, open your ears wide to the voice of God’s Son so you can clearly distinguish the Shepherd’s voice from the voice of the hireling. Never be satisfied with being somewhat religious outwardly while remaining just as worldly within. Shun such folly. Always keep a clear testimony, and never be in league with the world. You must be radical in this, because Christ and Baal, God and the world, can never be united. Never be ashamed of the name of Jesus, but profess it boldly; your boldness will increase and your reward will be great. Remember that Paul, Elijah, and all the other men of God were men with the same nature as we. Therefore, stand fast in the ranks, hard as steel, and fight along with Daniel’s men.

If you lack wisdom from God, ask for it; He gives willingly and without reproach. However there is a powerful reproach in what the apostle writes that most men have no knowledge of God. If you want to learn of God, spend time with Him, because you become like the one with whom you spend time.

Keep saying “yes” to Jesus, “no” to yourself, and “no” to the world. If you do this, your speech will simply be “yes” and “no,” and you know that anything more than this is of the devil.

My testimony is that God has given me His beloved Son. He dwells in my heart by faith. Through faith in Him my peace is like a river. I will not boast in anything but Him and my weakness, for He has allowed me to go through fire and water. But I have always gained the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

For whom He loves He chastens, and He scourges every son whom He receives. The greater a person wants to become in this world, the more discipline and education he needs. Exactly the same thing is true of the kingdom of God. The deeper you want to press into the things of God, the narrower the way becomes for your life in this world; but then, your eyes and ears will be open that much more to the powers of the world to come. That is why it is also written that he who loses his life in this world shall find it.

Now you have a vast land, a wide field before you. Press on and do not fear — the Lord is with you. The walls of Jericho will fall, its inhabitants will flee, and every place you conquer will become yours. Christ has all power in heaven and on earth; He has the keys of death and hell. Hell itself is under His control — death also. So we did the right thing when we said “yes” to such a mighty Prince.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, July 5, 1905 — # 4


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very welcome letter today. It was a great joy for me to see your testimony in Christ, that you love Him without guile in all simplicity. You’ve made a precious choice, dear brother. May the peace of God always be with you richly. God will make you more than a conqueror in Jesus Christ. I’m glad that you are finding your comfort in the Word and that you are getting victory over the devil and his ways. The devil can only be manifested through human beings. He is not revealed in the air or the clouds. The devil has no business with us. “One Word of God can bind him!” Luther writes. Light dispels darkness, truth drives falsehood away, righteousness overcomes unrighteousness, etc.

We have received a kingdom that cannot be shaken, that cannot be grasped with hands. For a lie can no more refute the truth than the father of lies, the devil, can overcome us, because we dwell in a kingdom that consists of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. “If you would believe you would see the glory of God.” It is a question of faith. We who believe enter into rest. “What is this rest?” you may ask. Rest is total surrender to God. It is to lie perfectly still in His hands like clay in the hands of a potter. Christ has the keys of death and hell; we have nothing to be afraid of.

It is God who is at work in us both to will and to do. We have this exceedingly great power in earthen vessels, that the glory might be God’s and not ours. The life within us is Christ; we are nothing. He must increase; we must decrease.

You referred to 1 John 3:9: “Whoever has been born of God does not sin, for His seed remains in him; and he cannot sin, because he has been born of God.” Yes, that is precious. We become like Joseph and say: “How then can I do this great wickedness, and sin against God?” We cannot, because His love (His seed) has been poured out in our hearts. We can’t cross someone we love. Read David’s first psalm.

I have absolutely nothing against your letter. On the contrary, I rejoiced to see your zeal and determination. As you perhaps know, I end up being at odds with almost everyone. This is because to them the Word comes across like a sword, not as spirit and life. All things are naked and open before the eyes of Him with whom we have to do, so we don’t need to pretend or play the hypocrite. By this time a great many people should have become teachers in Christ, but they have turned aside from the way of truth. They are dead; all they have left is a name that they live. Such people are a vexation — avoid them. What the heart is full of, the mouth speaks. If our hearts are full of God, we speak godly things; if they are full of the world, we speak of the world. There is no “middle ground.” Either we serve God or we serve the world. To do both is impossible. We can’t fool God. He is exceedingly radical. His eyes run to and fro throughout the whole earth, to show Himself strong on behalf of those whose heart is perfect toward Him.

Therefore, let us purify our souls in obedience to the truth unto a sincere love of the brethren so that we can love one another with a pure heart fervently.

In Job 32, from verse 1, you will see that it is not always the elderly who are wise or the aged who understand what is right, but that it is the Spirit of the Lord in a man that gives him understanding. I’m thankful to God for His good Holy Spirit. He teaches me and fashions me in truth. He gives me understanding of spiritual things, and for this reason no one is able to overpower me. I don’t have this in myself, but again I say that it is the Spirit of God that is in me. Therefore, dear brother, if you seek wisdom, always obey the Spirit of God. This will mean chastisement, to be sure; but bear in mind that chastisement brings wisdom, tribulation produces patience, etc. God is a master in dealing with us.

God’s Word is my one and only desire. I love God’s Word so much that I’m often completely oblivious to everything else for long periods. If this is boasting, then let it be boasting, because it is the truth, and Christ is the Truth. It is written, “Let him who boasts, boast in the Lord.” That is lawful. By the Word of God I don’t just understand the Scriptures, I also understand what can make me truly happy. No one but Jesus can make us happy. That’s also why it’s written that the Word became flesh and dwelt among us. He was made to be sin for us so that He might destroy sin.

“Let goods and kindred go,

This mortal life also;

The body they may kill:

God’s truth abideth still,

His kingdom is forever.” *

This is total surrender.

Just as you have now received Christ Jesus, so walk in Him. I can’t emphasize strongly enough that you must never look back again. Let us set a straight course: forward and homeward. Let us not lose courage in tribulations and chastisement, for we know what glory they bring. “Gold is tested in the fire, and acceptable men are purified in the furnace of humiliation.” All the way down — not just part of the way. “The greater you are, the more you must humble yourself,” we read in the Apocrypha. This is the way, the truth, and the life. He has given us an example worthy of following. This is the narrow way — can you see it??? Here the mind of the flesh must be brought to silence in sufferings and death. Will you follow Him here? If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. What matters now is to have counted the cost, so that, having laid a foundation, we don’t give up and become a laughingstock because we began to build without the means to finish. Through all this, joy in God is our strength. What a mystery — hidden from the wise and prudent, but revealed to babes!

Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan


* From the hymn “A mighty fortress is our God” by Martin Luther.





Horten, July 20, 1905 — # 5


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus our Lord!

I received your very precious letter, and it is a great joy and comfort for me to see your joy and peace in Christ Jesus. Joy in God is our strength. Joy gives us the power and strength to forsake worldly lusts. I heard that you went to a church service and found it sluggish, heavy, long, and drawn out. Yes, I know just how that is, but what you wrote is true: it is that way because the people are unbelieving.

You also wrote that you said a bad word when you nearly fell head first while out bicycling, and yet God didn’t reprove you. Yes, that’s how it is, and it is wonderful in our eyes. I became aware of this through an experience of my own after I got converted. I told Pastor X about it, hoping to find out why I wasn’t reproved when I unintentionally did what was wrong, but he gave me no answer.

But God, who is mighty in instruction and doctrine, has been my teacher, not man. What God has given me He has given by revelation in His knowledge. And now, dear brother, I will tell you the reason; but not everyone can bear such truths. May God give you insight, understanding, and the spirit of revelation in the knowledge of Him. Ephesians 1:17. Please read that verse.

When I sin willfully, this sin is a fruit of my lusts, leading to death. Then I live according to the flesh and must die, spiritually speaking. Lust conceives and brings forth sin.

But there is sin which does not lead to death — for example, the sin you committed on your bicycle trip. You did what you hated, so it wasn’t you that did it, but the sin that dwells in you. Romans 7:17. Such things happen all our life. Paul studied this thoroughly, and having considered the matter carefully, he came to the conclusion in 7:25: “I thank God — through Jesus Christ our Lord! So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.”

Our mind serves God, but our flesh can’t do anything but serve the law of sin, because whatever is born of the flesh is flesh. Nonetheless, there is no condemnation for those who are in Christ, who do not walk according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. To walk according to the flesh means to live according to one’s lusts. But it is written that those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its lusts and desires. When our lusts and desires are crucified, it is impossible for them to conceive and bring forth sin. Conception takes place when the mind gives its consent to a carnal lust. Sin is born when the body carries out an act of sin. But if we serve the law of God with our mind, we reject all the lusts of the flesh, and these become unfruitful, since no sinful act results. But if we do what we hate, it is no more we that do it, but sin that dwells in us.

That is what makes grace grace. What love of God! All our boasting is excluded. God gave you joy by blessing you in spite of what you did. Didn’t that soften your heart, so that you hated even your own life in this world, the life which could be — and was — so vile despite God’s infinite love? But when we hate even our own lives, we are His disciples indeed. Accordingly, we will always be delivered to death for Jesus’ sake, that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh.

How exceedingly valuable and precious to be found in Him, not having our own righteousness, based on law, but that which is through faith in Jesus Christ, God’s Son!

It is a great joy to me that you are beginning to distinguish between the voice of the Shepherd and the voice of the hireling, who flees when a wolf comes. We can never be radical enough here. Proclaim the truth everywhere; you will become exceedingly happy when you do this, but people will say that you have a devil and are mad. The man who was born blind was cast out of the synagogue because he gave glory to Jesus, but once he was outside, he met Jesus. We, too, meet Jesus outside when we are cast out of the synagogues. In His great grace and mercy, God has given me of His spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him. But when I speak, they are for war, even though my heart exults with joy. I tried to be silent, the prophet says, but then the Word became a power in me which would tear my bones asunder. Hallelujah for such power! Paul never yielded in subservience to anyone. It is written that nobody prevailed over Elisha.

You wrote, “I have the Spirit and follow the Spirit.” Hallelujah for that, brother! The mind of the Spirit is life and peace, but Satan’s mind is closed to the things of God. All who are led by the Spirit of God are the sons of God, and truly, the Spirit doesn’t lead us to do wrong. Write again soon. It is always interesting to hear how you are doing.

Your brother in the same redemption in Christ,

Johan





Horten, July 25, 1905 — # 6


Dear Brother Aksel,

I long to write some more to you in Christ Jesus.

The just shall live by faith. That is, we are justified by faith, just as our father Abraham was. There is only one faith, one baptism, and one God, the Father of us all. There is a saying: “Every man is blessed in his own faith.” But this is not true when his faith is but one of a hundred different kinds. Every man, however, is blessed in his faith when it is the faith of Jesus Christ, God’s Son. Not even faith is our own; it is the faith of the Son of God. This is the “one” faith. This is the faith that Abraham and all God’s men of old had, because they looked forward to the promise. Old Simeon had this faith, because he said, “Lord, now You are letting Your servant depart in peace, according to Your word; for my eyes have seen Your salvation.” By faith the elders obtained a good testimony. Hebrews 11:2.

Once we have received faith, then “faith without works is dead.” The works of faith are the fruits of the Spirit. By faith, the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us. By faith, we are sanctified through and through. By faith, we grow up to the Head, to mature manhood in Christ. Unless we become like little children, we will not enter into the kingdom of heaven. After we have entered in, however, the intention is that we shall grow according to the growth that God gives. To grow up in this kingdom is to mature in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit, because the kingdom of God consists of these things.

Chastisement brings wisdom. The Lord disciplines those He loves, and scourges every son He receives. If you are chastened by the Lord, it is not in order to condemn you. The one who is without chastisement is illegitimate; he is not a true son.

Taking heed to correction brings understanding, and a well-disciplined soul is careful to avoid evil. It’s not how long a person has lived that determines his maturity; only godliness produces true maturity. Therefore Paul writes to Timothy, “Let no one despise your youth.” Old people don’t always understand what is right.

We can learn what wisdom and knowledge are from the young man Elihu (in Job, starting in chapter 32). And James writes, “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach…” But the one who asks God for wisdom must prepare his back for chastening, because chastening brings forth wisdom. To begin with, wisdom leads us on tortuous paths. But later, when she can trust us, having tested us with her ordinances, she will come straight back to us and gladden us. Sirach 4:17–19 [Apocrypha]. The one who seeks wisdom must diligently search the writings of the ancients and the prophets. “The wisdom of the scribe depends on the opportunity of leisure… How can he become wise who handles the plow, and who glories in the shaft of a goad, who drives oxen and is occupied with their work, and whose talk is about bulls?” Sirach 38:24–26.

The devil understands and has a keen sense for the things of man, but no understanding at all of the things of God. The new creation is of God, and the devil can never get at it. Satan’s head was crushed on the cross. The new creation came into being after the death of Christ. The devil knows nothing about it, since it came into being after his head was crushed. He can only perceive the things of man. That is why it is written: “He who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life.” The devil only understands about the life of this world. The more we lay down our lives, the more Satan’s head is crushed under our feet. That’s why it is written that as many as received Him, to them He gave the right to become children of God. Greater is He who is in you than he who is in the world. The spiritual man judges all things, but he is judged by no one, for who has known the mind of the Lord so as to instruct Him?

These things are so glorious, dear Aksel, that I could talk about them day and night. My heart has found great rest and peace in God’s delightful ways and in the knowledge of Him. The angel Gabriel told Daniel that he was a man greatly beloved, and that his prayers had been heard from the day he set his heart to understand wisdom.

Since you have already begun to understand God’s will and His ways, I advise you to devote yourself wholeheartedly to understanding the wisdom of God, because it will bring you great joy. With this wisdom you will rejoice over your wise answers. At meetings, people will wait for you to speak. When you begin to speak, they will incline their ears; and as you continue, they will put their hands over their mouths. Honor and riches are in wisdom’s left hand, and long life is in her right.

Truly, her ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. The kingdom of God does not consist of dry teaching, but of spirit, life, and power. We can’t study our way to God’s wisdom. The things we read and learn are absorbed by our human mind — our carnal mind; but the mind of the flesh is hostile toward God.

Revelation from God is given to each one for the profit of all. The more obedient we are, the more of God’s knowledge becomes profitable to us, and the more of it we receive.

The kingdom of God does not consist of food and drink. We don’t come together just to enjoy ourselves and have a good time, but to build each other up. Every tongue that rises against you in judgment, you will condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord. Lay hold of this inheritance as quickly as possible, dear Aksel.

Stand with the helmet of salvation on your head and the armor of righteousness upon your loins, having your feet shod with the preparation and readiness of the gospel of peace, and take the shield of faith with which you will be able to quench all the fiery darts of the evil one. And take the sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Thus armed, we can stand firmly and say with Luther,

“Let goods and kindred go,

This mortal life also;

The body they may kill:

God’s truth abideth still,

His kingdom is forever.” *

The doctrine of Christ is radical and cuts to the quick. Woe to those who rise against it! Even Paul could do nothing against the truth, only for the truth.

Christ didn’t come to bring peace. Two shall be against three and three against two in the same house. These two kingdoms — the kingdom of darkness and the kingdom of light — cannot be at peace, because war has been declared between them. Love rejoices in the truth. Paul was a fragrance in every place, an aroma of death leading to death among those who were perishing and of life leading to life among those who were being saved. And so he asks, “Who is sufficient for these things?”

I was like a steam boiler on the point of bursting, or like Elihu in Job 32, from verse 19. Now I am free, because I have spoken the truth in Christ Jesus, and no one can refute what I have written. This is my boast and my inheritance in Christ. I will not seek my own honor but His, because those who seek His honor are true, and there is no guile in them. Contradiction and sufferings of every kind prepared the Captain of our salvation. Christ’s entire life was one long battle, especially against religious people. He encountered constant opposition and resistance. In His spirit He never turned aside, neither to the left nor to the right. He let them pull out His beard; He endured mockery and scorn. Yet He never said, “I regret what I have said and repent in sackcloth and ashes.” This is what Satan and the world want.

“Although they cannot refute the words,

They are not thankful for what they’ve heard.”

Write soon. Your brother in the same grace, under the same conditions, and a partaker of the same tribulations, chastisement, and education,

Johan


* From the hymn “A mighty fortress is our God” by Martin Luther.





Horten, July 31, 1905 — # 7


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your letter, which clearly shows that you are happy in Christ Jesus.

The Spirit gives life; the flesh profits nothing. The Lord is the Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. A person who has the Spirit of God has nothing to hide; thus, everything can be brought out into the light. When we walk in this light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Christ, God’s Son, cleanses us from all sin. Who is he that condemns? It is Christ who has died — yes, and has risen.

I hear that you had an encounter with someone who wanted to “set you straight.” Most likely, he was one of the “ten thousand.” You may have ten thousand instructors in Christ, but you don’t have many fathers, the apostle writes. But it is grace that teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and not these ten thousand instructors.

You also wrote about the people you were together with. You said that they were worldly but that you found great joy in preaching the Word to them. We can’t make rules about this. “All things are lawful for me … but I will not be brought under the power of any,” the apostle writes. “If any of those who do not believe invites you to dinner, and you desire to go, eat whatever is set before you, asking no question for conscience’ sake.” But this is the point: we serve the law of God with our minds and the law of sin with our flesh. The ungodly serve the law of sin with their mind and their flesh; that’s the difference.

If, like the apostle, we can say with absolute certainty: “For we are to God the fragrance of Christ among those who are being saved and among those who are perishing. To the one we are the aroma of death leading to death, and to the other the aroma of life leading to life. And who is sufficient for these things?” (2 Corinthians 2:15–16) — if we are truly sufficient for these things, we can go into the worst dens of iniquity and into kings’ palaces, because we are like a fire in dry straw.

But if we are weak and have a tendency to be unequally yoked with unbelievers, the best thing we can do is to separate ourselves from them as quickly as possible. After all, what accord has Christ with Belial, God with the world, or unbelief with faith? 2 Corinthians 6:14–17. “Therefore come out from among them and be separate, says the Lord. Do not touch what is unclean, and I will receive you.” Our mind and the mind of the world are diametrically opposed. The world has the mind of the flesh, which is death, but we have the mind of the Spirit, which is life and peace. We need to purge out the old leaven and become a new lump. “Let us cleanse ourselves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.”

Touch pitch, and it will stick to you; touch fire, and you will burn yourself; touch sin, and you will feel its sting. We have great freedom in Christ, but under no circumstances may it be used as an occasion for the flesh. “Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Certainly not! How shall we who died to sin live any longer in it?”

Let us never seek the broad ways. Let us never try to see how far into the world we can go and still be a Christian! People’s hearts and minds are turned toward the world and the fleshpots of Egypt, and they will succeed in attaining what they eagerly desire and pursue. But let us earnestly desire God’s wisdom and power and those things which are above, and let us forget the things that are in the world. “I could wish you were cold or hot,” says the Lord. “So then, because you are lukewarm … I will vomit you out of My mouth.” A halfway commitment is useless; it just turns us into religious “slaves” who are like pillars of salt which has lost its taste. Cold or hot! God will not let anyone play the hypocrite before Him. He has eyes like flames of fire. All things are naked and open to the eyes of Him with whom we have to do. He doesn’t need anyone who is ungodly. He is not served by men’s hands as though He needed something. He Himself gives life and spirit to all men.

If we want to be servants of the Lord, we must speak as the Word of the Lord, which is first and foremost living, and secondly sharp — sharper than any two-edged sword. It isn’t blunt or dull; it pierces even to the division of joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart.

It appears from your last letter that you want to keep your worldly friends and still abide in Christ. But let me tell you, dear Aksel: you will have to win them, or they will win you. Countless numbers of people have tried to unite God and the world, but it has always failed and has brought destruction on those who have tried. If you are happy in Christ, don’t sell your birthright for a mess of pottage, like Esau did. Later he sought with tears to regain it, but in vain. If you want to be as healthy and strong as a young lion and jump like a fattened calf, then flee from the world and its glory, and preach to your friends in a way that makes them either take to their heels or melt at your fiery words.

I can’t help but speak the way I do. May God give you insight and the revelation of the Spirit so you can understand His mysteries, which are totally foreign to the wise and prudent of this world. The truth is not supposed to conform to us; we must conform to the truth. You shall know the truth, and the truth shall set you free. Christ is the way, the truth, and the life; He surpasses all our understanding. If we acknowledge falsehood, falsehood will be our portion. If we acknowledge the truth, truth will be our portion.

Wisdom will lead us through fire and water. The truth is radical and ruthless against our life in this world. God did not spare His Son, either.

Please read Luke 11, from verse 37. Jesus dined with one of the Pharisees, yet notice how He took them to task! A meal didn’t make Him a slave to His hosts.

Acts 6:10 says about Stephen: “And they were not able to resist the wisdom and the Spirit by which he spoke.” In Acts 7:57 they stopped their ears and ran at him with one accord. Stephen was well suited to preach to the world, because no one could withstand him. That’s why they hated him. Stephen was a tremendous stumbling block.

Abraham sat in the counsels of God. He objected when God wanted to destroy Sodom, and God gave heed to his words. Lot was righteous, too, but God couldn’t speak to him as He could to Abraham. It is the same today. It is possible to give ourselves to God so completely and unreservedly that we are allowed to sit in His intimate counsels. It is interesting to be there. Things become clear for us. We are not uncertain in our affairs; we are completely certain and can speak with full assurance. We believe, therefore we speak. If we are uncertain, we speak with uncertainty. But faith is the full assurance of things not seen. It is not a vague kind of assurance.

How wonderful that you can now see clearly that we have to serve the law of God with our minds and the law of sin with our flesh. Paul even thanks God for this fact. It is a strange thing, but in this way our own boasting will always be excluded, and grace will constantly chasten us. We need not be ignorant of these things, even though they’re hidden from most people. They don’t dare believe it — this is pure cowardice. It does take a certain amount of boldness to believe it. Norway’s freedom was gained by a sudden coup. Likewise, we gain freedom in Christ by a series of sudden coups. Break every form of union and every connection with the world. They try to impose conditions. Scorn these, too. Satan is crushed, and the condition is to believe it.

Please greet the family. It is so common to want to work, but the point is this: "It is God who works in you both to will and to do for His good pleasure.” All human activity on our part is futile.

I talked to Captain X a few days ago, and again today. He said he couldn’t stand people who are constantly talking about God. He felt we should keep that for our private prayer closet. I replied that it wouldn’t be so easy to go out into all the world and make disciples of all nations if we all just crept into our prayer closets. He bit his tongue and held his peace. I talk with the arsenal quartermaster about these things a lot, since I work in his office during the day. Today I read Luke 11 to him, where Jesus was a dinner guest, and he laughed and rejoiced.

Write soon. It is such a joy to hear from you.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, August 2, 1905 — # 8


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your letter.

It is interesting to write to you concerning the things that are above. Nothing gives me more joy than to search out the tremendous riches God has bestowed on us. I wouldn’t exchange them for all the wisdom of the world, for the wisdom of this world is passing away. I will not boast of myself; God shall have all the honor — He who pulled me from the mouth of death and out of the pit of darkness. He turned my mind from folly and set my feet upon a rock. Of myself I know nothing, for I am more stupid by worldly standards than most people. What I have, I have received from God — without works and without payment. According to the flesh I am evil from the sole of my foot to the top of my head. My best works are swollen with egotism; my love overflows with self-admiration. My “Christianity” only accentuates all the outward splendor that is used to gather all honor into the unfillable barns of self.

This way of life became repulsive to me. I realized that I was saturated with the leaven of malice. I said to God: Surely I’m not a Christian. My life is an abomination, and I fall short in every area.

From that moment, Christ became my life. I came to understand that He is the life. From that moment, I saw myself as a wreck. I hate my life in this world, because it is evil, and I will never again try to make something of it.

Blessed is everyone who has made himself a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. “He who is able to accept it, let him accept it,” Jesus says. By the grace of God that is in me I will tell you a little about this. Let everything lead to godliness.

What is a eunuch? A man who has been castrated. Such a man can have no relations with women. What is the woman? She is the world. Who or what is the man? He is the flesh. The flesh is attracted to the world, just as the man is attracted to the woman. But when one has made oneself a eunuch for the sake of the kingdom of heaven, it means that he has rendered himself incapable of any relationship with the world. He has severed all connections to the world. The flesh is then a eunuch, for it remains alone. A person who belongs to Christ has crucified the flesh with its lusts and desires. We can’t grasp God’s wisdom with our mind the same way we learn world history. We must lay hold of it with our heart — not with our head, because we believe with our heart, and not with our head. Christ, the wisdom of God, dwells by faith in our heart, not in our head. Blessed are they who have not defiled themselves with women; they are like virgins. First the natural, then the spiritual. The Master says that if we can’t understand the natural things, then how could we understand the spiritual things, if He told them to us? That’s why He spoke to them in parables. Our vocabulary is only useful for natural things. When we explain heavenly things, we have to use the words the Holy Spirit teaches us and express the spiritual meaning in parables.

To speak in tongues is to speak in the Spirit without using one’s understanding, but then there must be someone present who can interpret. To speak prophetically is to speak in the Spirit and with one’s understanding. God far surpasses our understanding, so we can best approach Him by not using our understanding. However, for the sake of those who are listening, it is better to speak five words with the understanding than ten thousand words in tongues. We can also pray in tongues, but there, too, our understanding is unfruitful. You can read about this in 1 Corinthians 14. Nowadays people meditate far too little on the law of the Lord; that’s why we never hear them talking about speaking in tongues or about prophesying. These gifts still exist, yet most people don’t know anything about them.

There is much indeed to be marveled at in God’s glorious wisdom. We shall see greater things than these, for Christ surpasses all comprehension. The Mediator is not a Mediator for one, but God is one. It is the Mediator who dwells in the heart; but since He is not just for one, neither can we be. Nevertheless, we have the same mind, as far as we have come.

As I have said before, my greatest joy is to write and speak about these things. Dear Aksel, if you want to enter into full rest and trust, and receive power and the strength of wisdom, sever yourself from everything for the sake of the kingdom of heaven. Don’t take those who call themselves Christians as your examples; let Christ Himself be your example. Only when you’ve seen the outcome of a believer’s life in Christ can you follow his faith. I have been thoroughly disappointed in people who have a reputation for being alive, so I have learned not to give them an automatic stamp of approval. Everyone who does righteousness is born of God. One who associates with a proud person becomes like him. God’s Spirit is very mobile, penetrating both the poor man’s hovel and the king’s castle. To be spiritual — or to be like the Spirit — is one and the same thing.

People in the world are all striving in one direction: they are all trying to be great, greater, greatest. But in order to attain this goal, they have to despise the lower things and aim for the higher, from glory to glory — to the very fullness of Satan. However, that is not the kind of glory or the kind of fullness we are to aim for. There is no pride in God, but the devil is saturated with pride. God is even interested in a compost pile, where He feeds the little insects that would otherwise perish. Such a thing is indeed revolting to those who are great in this world; therefore God has also rightly condemned man himself to decay and to become food for worms.

Write soon. Be quick to become an elder, for wisdom is true maturity. Never be the slave of minister, deacon, or any other man, for you are bought with a price.

As you see, dear Aksel, I’m speaking quite freely and openly. I’ve tried both, but prefer freedom to bondage. If anybody will listen to me, well and good. And if not, that’s also well and good, because I no longer live myself, and that is my testimony. Would you say the same — could you?

I’ve written a letter to Captain X, declaring to him what I have seen and heard. May God give him light, because the Spirit of God has been working much in him. He didn’t like what he heard, but it’s important that he hears more. From now on we know no man according to the flesh. Captain X gives much to the poor, because he is a rich man.

Greet those who are at home, and best regards to you from your brother,

Johan





Horten, August 5, 1905 — # 9


Dear Brother Aksel,

Yesterday I was sick in bed, but today I’m better and up again. It is good to know that whether we live or die, we belong to the Lord. This glorious hope does not put us to shame, for God is true and every man is a liar. It’s up to us to make use of the power God has given us. It is possible to multiply our “talent” and become rich in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. We can press in with violence, taking the kingdom of God by force. And just what is God’s kingdom? Clearly, a kingdom consisting of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit; so let us pursue peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. This is what it means to press into the kingdom of God. Sin brought sickness, sorrow, and death into the world, and our body is subject to its laws. But we have something within us that isn’t visible, something we can neither pinpoint nor handle — namely, Christ in us, the hope of glory. Our body is only a shell, a dwelling place of the Spirit. We have this treasure in earthen vessels. Just as we once presented our bodies as slaves of sin, we should now present them as slaves of righteousness. Romans 6:19. This way our bodies become members of Christ, because they are serving the Spirit of God and accomplishing His will. We speak in part and understand in part. There is much to be said about our bodies, for they also serve the law of sin. But as David says: “Blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not impute iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.” What you wrote about the unfitting remark you made while on that bicycle trip was extremely instructive. Starting from there, we can go on to glorious conclusions. There was no guile in your spirit, so the Lord did not impute this transgression to you. And so you were “blessed,” as David said. But without a doubt, if there had been guile in your spirit, you would not have escaped without paying for it, even to the last penny. You served the law of sin with your flesh, but your mind did not consent to it, because you hated what you did. So it was not you, but sin that dwells in you.

The fact is that we can do such things and still feel the grace of God over us. That He does not reprove us brings us to the Scripture which says that the grace of God chastens us [Norw.] to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts. Here we see this chastening. This is God’s grace. If you love a person very much and happen to do something quite unintentionally against him, wouldn’t you hate your own deed? And if your friend didn’t even reprove you, wouldn’t that be overwhelming for you? Your friend’s forbearance would be extremely severe chastisement — far worse than eight days in jail. This is how God chastens us. The grace of God disciplines us. Paul does write about some who were eager to go around chastising others in order to make slaves of them. But even if you have ten thousand of these instructors, he writes, you don’t have many fathers. These taskmasters exist in full number today, but God’s grace should chasten us, and not these disciplinarians. If you allow yourself to be disciplined by them and submit to them, then what is written in Isaiah 66:17 will happen to you: “Those who sanctify themselves and purify themselves, to go to the gardens after an idol in the midst, eating swine’s flesh and the abomination and the mouse, shall be consumed together,’ says the Lord.” We must sanctify and purify ourselves according to God’s standard, not according to the standard of people who eat animals and mice. Never allow yourself to be chastened by these ten thousand instructors when your own conscience doesn’t judge you. By nature, people are inclined to chastise others in order to win them over, if possible, so they can boast in the other’s flesh. But woe to them who submit to such people! Blessed is the man who meditates in the law of the Lord day and night.

I’ll close for now, because it isn’t so easy to know what to write before I know how things are going. Revelation in the knowledge of God is given to each one for his profit. In light of this, we understand that it is not profitable to receive everything all at once. But one thing is certain: You shall see greater things than these!

Write again soon. Your letters give me a starting point and material to work with. Don’t bow before others in subservience, but always yield to the truth. We will speak of many more things, dear Aksel, which will serve to liberate and edify us.

Your brother, resting in the light and in the fellowship of Christ,

Johan





Horten, August 9, 1905 — # 10


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very precious letter today, which tells me that the light is shining more and more clearly toward the perfect day. God is light, and there is no darkness in Him at all. He dwells in our hearts by faith; that’s why light is shining there. But light also contains heat, so we have both light and warmth in our hearts. What is more, we are planted beside streams of water, so we will surely grow according to the growth God gives — without any anxiety. What you wrote about the convicting work of God’s Spirit was quite clear. For the sinner, this conviction works pain — deep pain — until he loses his life; but then he also finds life — eternal life. Once we’ve been thoroughly convicted of our sin and we receive the Master, we become thoroughly convicted concerning righteousness, because Jesus has risen and gone to His Father, and we see Him no more. John 16:10. Then faith comes. Why would we need faith for something we already see? Then we are also blessed, for blessed are they who do not see and yet believe. God’s Word is what matters, so it is a joy to see you searching for light there. He who seeks, finds. Personally, I have searched and “dug” much in God’s Word. I have also found much that makes me certain and strong in God. Yet there is so much more to search for, because He surpasses all knowledge. His Word never fails. It solves its own mysteries, as riddles and parables are solved. The Scriptures are closed for us until the One who opened them for the two on the road to Emmaus opens them for us. Then our hearts burn within us because of the penetrating light and warmth. But such revelations are only given when it is profitable. 1 Corinthians 12:7. If we are zealous, more and more of these revelations will soon become profitable for us. However, for the indifferent person, what he already has is more than enough. Indeed, even what he has will be taken from him. But we can increase our “pound” and receive a good testimony from the Master, entering into the Father’s joy on that Day.

There is one fellowship and one faith. This fellowship is with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ. God is neither Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist, Lutheran, nor Methodist. He is: “I Am”! We are to be perfect, just as our heavenly Father is perfect. God will not be named after a man; He Himself gives life and breath to all. No one dares to name Him after Luther, or Paul, or Cephas, since He is the true Father of all who are called children in heaven and on earth, and it is unheard of for the father to be named after the child. We are the bride of Christ, which is why we have received His name on our foreheads. If my wife wanted to take another man’s name, she would have to find another husband, just like the coin which the Master looked at and said, “Render therefore to Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and to God the things that are God’s.” Why should we call Christ’s bride Mrs. Luther or Mrs. Wesley? Did Luther or Wesley die for us? No, and again no! Adultery, murder, and factions are of the devil. There is no other name under heaven given among men by which we must be saved than the name of Jesus Christ. The sword of the Spirit, which is living and sharp, is more than able to keep open waters around that precious name. There will be a gulf, for sure, between the name of Christ and the names of the sects. The rich man and Lazarus are not to have any connection.

If you read Revelation 17:3, you will find the harlot sitting on the beast. Don’t all the state churches also sit upon the states? It is from the national governments that the “clergy” receive their salaries. What is that if it isn’t being “borne” by the beast? We took nothing from the Gentiles, Paul writes.

Appointing a priest according to the law of a fleshly commandment to care for souls is of little value. We ourselves are kings and priests, and Christ is our High Priest, who did not become one according to the law of a fleshly commandment, but according to the power of an indestructible life. Hebrews 7:16. We are descendants of this High Priest, because we are bone of His bones and flesh of His flesh. This is the doctrine of Christ. All other doctrines come straight from the devil, even though people try so hard to uphold their traditions. It is enough just to keep to the name of Christ.

However, it is possible to win a certain carnal esteem by adopting the name of the State Church and seeking refuge in its bosom. One thing is certain: the foundation of the State Church is the state, but no one can lay any other foundation than the one that is already laid, which is Jesus Christ. If anyone can convince me in the Spirit of God and by the Scriptures that I have written a lie and that the State Church is of God, I’m willing to stand corrected, for I can do nothing against the truth.

I haven’t upbraided you, dear Aksel, for being in the state church — far from it! Jesus didn’t even upbraid the woman who was caught in adultery; but He did say one thing to her after she was convicted: “Go and sin no more.” From everyone to whom much is given, much will be required. Each of us is pleasing to God according to what he has, not according to what he does not have.

Paul writes to Timothy: “Convince, rebuke, and exhort.” This is our work, too: not first chastening, but first convincing. Only someone who has been convinced can receive chastening. Chastisement and rebukes rain down on every hand, but there is precious little done to convince people.

It was really good to hear that it is now going well with Selma. I could see that she was not far from the kingdom of God last autumn in Arendal. May she be direct, open, and forthright on the new way she has begun on.

We never need to be hypocritical with one another. Let’s just be open about whatever is on our hearts and cleanse out everything so that we can love each other fervently with a pure heart. Only pure hearts can melt together. Impurities act as insulation. It is useless trying to conceal anything. The Spirit, who searches all things, will find it in an instant.

By writing about these things, we can get extremely good instruction ourselves, because light often comes as we write. We also learn to express ourselves as clearly and concisely as possible.

It would be interesting to talk face to face. Greet Selma and everyone at home. I received Father’s letter.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, August 14, 1905 — # 11


Dear Brother Aksel,

“It is better to hear the rebuke of the wise than for a man to hear the song of fools.” Ecclesiastes 7:5. “Whoever loves instruction loves knowledge, but he who hates correction is stupid.” Proverbs 12:1. “The righteous will never be removed, but the wicked will not inhabit the earth.” Proverbs 10:30.

“Wisdom is radiant and unfading, and she is easily discerned by those who love her, and is found by those who seek her.” Wisdom of Solomon 6:12 [Apocrypha]. “I learned both what is secret and what is manifest, for wisdom, the fashioner of all things, taught me. For in her there is a spirit that is intelligent, holy, unique, manifold, subtle, mobile, clear, unpolluted, distinct, invulnerable, loving the good, keen, irresistible, beneficent, humane, steadfast, sure, free from anxiety, all-powerful, overseeing all, and penetrating through all spirits that are intelligent and pure and most subtle. For wisdom is more mobile than any motion; because of her pureness she pervades and penetrates all things.” 7:21–24. If you want to possess this spirit, it will meet you in the doorway. If you obey it, it will prepare and mold you; but if you are disobedient, it will forsake you. It prepares the saints of God from one generation to the next.

God’s Spirit is not dependent on deeply rooted customs and ceremonies, because it is mobile and flexible, and makes those it works with flexible, too. Wisdom will rule and reign eternally. So, if we want the honor of ruling with Him, we must also partake of wisdom. Christ is the wisdom of God. The work wrought in Christ is the wisdom of God. To fear the Lord is the beginning of wisdom; but in Christ is not only the beginning of wisdom: all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are also hidden in Him. In Him the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily. The fullness of the Godhead is the Spirit, who is mighty to guide us into all truth, and the fullness of the truth is Christ, and Christ and the Father are one. Christ is the Mediator between God and man. This is why He is also called “the way.” The Father is not “the way.” God is one, but mediators are not for just one. Take, for example, a young boy who is to be educated to become a professor. All his teachers are not just for one, but they produce one professor. This isn’t really a perfect illustration, but it can still lead to understanding. In the same way, it is written that no one can come to the Son unless the Father draws him, but the one who learns from the Father comes to the Son. First, the young boy looks at the professor and makes being a professor his goal. Then he begins to go through various classes with different teachers. The Son is the way to the Father. He is the Teacher of righteousness. No one can come to the Father except through Him. He who denies the Son, denies the Father as well. Christ teaches us one step at a time. We have access through the veil — that is, His flesh. We must die with Him. Those who stole must put to death the lust to steal. Those who were vain must give themselves over to death. The lust to smoke gets put to death — the lusts of drunkenness and laziness likewise. This is how we are conformed to His death. Philippians 3:10.

The slave is always asking for forgiveness and more forgiveness. On the other hand, we seek God for the power to put to death the indwelling lust — the very cause of sin. Thus we are constantly delivered to death, that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh.

This is where the entrance is — through His flesh. How many really want to enter here???? Indeed, flesh and blood do not inherit the kingdom of God; there is no breathing room here for the mind of the flesh. The cry, “Spare yourself!” is always of the devil.

Paul said with tears that many were enemies of the cross of Christ. Let us always abide in the doctrine that leads to godliness; this is the doctrine of Christ.

From now on we know no one according to the flesh, but according to the Spirit. Carnal people cannot please God; neither, of course, can they please us. So we don’t seek to please men and win their approval, as the world does. We seek God’s honor and let our honor be the scorn and mockery the world gives.

Nothing that would bind and fetter us is of God; it is of the devil. The Son’s task is always to set us free. The way we choose to live our life in this world is not without significance. If I sit down in a train compartment, I run the risk that the coach will roll away with me. But if I just sit in the cellar, I’ll get nowhere. If I take a seat in the State Church, it will carry me away; and if I begin to inquire of the Spirit of God, He will lead me. No one doubts that there is a difference between the Spirit of God and the State Church. The Spirit of God records my name in the Book of Life with the finger of the living God, but the State Church enrolls me in its membership register with pen and ink at the hand of one of its ministers. “But you are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, His own special people, that you may proclaim the praises of Him who called you out of darkness into His marvelous light.” This shows that those who are led into His marvelous light are priests. The priests in the old covenant were supposed to teach the people to discern between the unclean and the clean. It is just the same today.

As many as are led by the Spirit of God are the children of God, and God’s Spirit does not lead us into a human work. Ours is a kingdom that cannot be shaken, a kingdom that cannot be touched by hands, but we see plenty of sects and denominations that can! They are no more “spiritual” than that! The Spirit quickens; the flesh profits nothing. In other words, the whole denominational system falls into the category of profiting nothing, and what is unprofitable is not of God.

If you speak disparagingly to a Seventh Day Adventist about Adventism, he will be furious, more furious than if you spoke disparagingly about Christ. But when you meet a disciple of Jesus, he will laugh if you tear into Lutheranism and Methodism and all the other -isms, as long as you speak well of Jesus. People say that it doesn’t matter at all where they go to church. But doesn’t it make a tremendous difference? People flock to their respective “synagogues,” but it is written that you will be thrown out of all the synagogues. My heart rejoices that this truth has also become mine, because I have been shut out of all the synagogues. Now I belong to that sect which is opposed and spoken against everywhere. Acts 28:22. Please read this verse. I can breathe freely in this “sect,” because neither minister nor parish clerk is going to take the temperature of my soul and judge me according to their doctrinal tenets. The only thing that counts in this “sect” is a new creation. Church finery and clerical vestments mean nothing here, since no one is focusing on things that are seen. It isn’t the one who is well read and has studied much who is great, but the one in whom the Spirit of the Lord dwells, because God alone is great, and He is the One at work in us both to will and to do of His good pleasure. Our orders come from the One who has taught us to obey God rather than men.

You shall know the truth and the truth shall make you free. Everyone who practices righteousness is born of God. Our spirit is molded when we take up our cross in obedience. One person becomes a vessel for honor, another a vessel for dishonor. It does no good for us to run away crying when God begins to deal with us. God did not spare His Son; the Son learned obedience by the things that He suffered. To be united in the death of the Son, we must first be united in His sufferings. This is the fellowship of His sufferings. Philippians 3:10. If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. Isn’t this all really quite simple? Don’t ever get stuck in forms, customs, and appearances. Throw all your honor overboard, and God will teach you, instruct you, and honor you. The man whom God honors will be approved. There are so many things to talk about, dear Aksel, but we understand in part and prophesy in part. To prophesy is to speak in the Spirit and with the understanding.

I’ll stop for now. Write back soon, because it is good to hear how things are going.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, August 25, 1905 — # 12


Dear Brother Aksel,

Your most welcome letter arrived today. And after reading and rereading it a number of times, I get the impression that you yearn for more insight and revelation in the knowledge of God. You sense that there is more to attain in Christ Jesus. The apostles belonged to God before Pentecost, but they didn’t have the fullness of God’s Spirit within them then, like they did afterwards. Now you have come to the point where you see yourself as really stupid. If that’s how you feel, then the problem is caused by your lack of wisdom. James writes to such people: “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach, and it will be given to him.” Jesus didn’t feel that way, since He says that the Queen of the South marveled at the wisdom of Solomon, and “indeed a greater than Solomon is here!” Elihu didn’t have that feeling either, because he says to Job: “Truly my words are not false; one who is perfect in knowledge is with you.” It is a blessing, though, that you see you lack wisdom, because most people are wise in their ignorance. See Revelation 3:17. “Because you say, I am rich, have become wealthy, and have need of nothing — and do not know that you are wretched, miserable, poor, blind, and naked…” So it is good to know that we lack wisdom, because only those who know they lack something can sincerely pray for it. The Word of God is living. You know, too, that God gives willingly, without reproach. This is a wonderful way out of the stupidity you mentioned.

I gave my heart to God on May 17, 1898. I was very happy, but I didn’t realize that I lacked the Holy Spirit, which had been promised. It had not yet fallen upon me. See Acts 8:15–17. This did not happen until two-and-a-half years later. Then the Scriptures came alive for me for the first time, and I became like the two on the road to Emmaus: my heart burned within me as God’s Spirit opened up the Scriptures for me.

Ephesians 1, from verse 15, shows that this is scriptural. Some had received faith (verse 15), yet Paul continued to pray for them in verses 16 and 17, “that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give to you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him.” You can recognize yourself here, dear Aksel. If you had received this Spirit, it would be impossible for you to say, “I feel stupid,” because he who has the anointing from Him knows all things. It would be interesting to talk these things over together, because I believe you have an upright heart for Christ.

The question is whether you see yourself as totally inadequate, whether you have laid everything on His altar and are waiting for His fire, whether you are the clay and He the Potter so that He can mold you as He pleases. You can’t manage to live like a Christian; it would only be hypocrisy to try. You can never be pure, devout, and good. You are as black as soot and rotten to the core. All your best works are like filthy rags. Can you endorse all this? Swallow these pills, and let them work the sentence of death in you. Put your hand on your mouth, and never try to answer back. The law came in order that every mouth might be stopped and all the world might become guilty before God. Don’t you believe that your mouth is also included here, or will you try to climb in by another way? This is the door: “I am the door,” Jesus says. If we are dead with Him, we believe that we shall also live with Him. There is only one life, and that life is Christ. Christ in you, the hope of glory. His life must live in us, and our life must die. We are not meant to live our lives hanging our heads and pretending to be Christ-like. No, we must die. He must increase; I must decrease. In Him all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. “And no man has ascended to heaven but He who came down from heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven.” Understanding these things clearly brings an unspeakably great joy.

“Though you slave away,

Yet unchanged you stay;

Cross over the Jordan today.”

If you have passed through the Red Sea and have been delivered from Egypt and the Egyptians, don’t wander in circles in the wilderness for forty years. Rather, set your course at once for the promised land, because great clusters of grapes grow there.

I don’t doubt that your sins are forgiven; but when it comes to life beyond that, you fall short. The children of Israel failed to enter the land because of unbelief, and it is just the same today. Most Christians stick close to Mt. Sinai, studying the tables of the law. But the commandment produces wrath, so we ought to keep a distance from such people. Those who are in the land are different. They march around the walls of Jericho shouting “Hallelujah,” so that the walls crumble and the great giants vanish into thin air. They carry their lights in vessels of clay. They smash the pitchers to pieces, and the enemy takes to his heels, as he was destined to do.

There are many synagogues at the foot of Mt. Sinai, and from olden times there have always been people in each of them who read the law of Moses. But Moses’ eye does not grow dim, nor does his arm grow weak, as long as one iota of the law remains unfulfilled. The important thing for those who are still under the law is to push themselves hard in order to get results. Those who are in the land approach things differently, because their strength lies in quietness and confidence. The more they believe, the more they enter into rest. They rest from their works which, strangely enough, are the same works required by the law of Moses unto blood. This is remarkable indeed. Yet, this is how the Scripture must be fulfilled which says that the law has become our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. But once we have come to Christ, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. We understand that the law was given only so that sin might be made evident. God’s ways are amazing. He does things so “backwards” it seems — or rather, we ourselves are backwards and cannot be dealt with in a straightforward manner!

You also wrote about 2 Peter 1, from verse 5. Yes, here is a thorough schooling. Add to your faith virtue, Peter writes, and to virtue discretion. We mustn’t show too much virtue; we need to use discretion. But once we have learned to be discreet, we shouldn’t take too many liberties in that direction either, but be self-controlled; then, in self-control, we shouldn’t be impatient, but patient. Then again, in patience we must add godliness, and not complain. But in our godliness we need brotherly love, because we are obliged to love those who are in the same schooling. And to brotherly love we must add love to all men. Through these things we draw nearer, step by step, to Him who lets His rain fall upon the just and the unjust.

You wrote about older and younger Christians. I have the impression that you regard a 24-year-old as a young Christian and a 70-year-old as an old one. But that’s not how it is.

Read Wisdom of Solomon 4:8–9 [Apocrypha]. “For old age is not honored for length of time, nor measured by number of years; but understanding is grey hair for men, and a blameless life is ripe old age.” Timothy was young in terms of age. 1 Timothy 4:12. “Let no one despise your youth.” In spite of his youth he was supposed to preach and teach. Verses 11 and 13. “Till I come, give attention to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine.”

A man could easily be a 100-year-old so-called Christian and still know nothing of God, because all that time he hasn’t been interested in spiritual things. He could have been disobedient the whole 100 years. On the other hand, an 18-year-old boy could have been obedient, giving his all, thus finding favor in God’s eyes and receiving wisdom and prudence from God. This 18-year-old is the elder, and the 100-year-old, the younger.

Paul instructed Titus, as his own true son in the faith, to ordain elders in every place. Titus 1:4–5. He enjoined him to speak, exhort, and rebuke with all authority and not let anyone despise him. Titus 2:15. Joseph was the second youngest of twelve brothers, yet he was the eldest in terms of wisdom.

This has been a long letter, dear Aksel. May God give you a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him. Disregard everything soulish and all those old wives’ tales inherited from our forefathers. See yourself as standing face to face with God alone, as one who has to start from the beginning and learn everything from Him. Paul rejected all his learning and counted it as rubbish, that he might obtain the knowledge of God.

Write soon; it is so good to hear from you. Let Father read this letter. Please greet him and everyone at home.

Yours in Christ,

Johan





Horten, September 6, 1905 — # 13


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you so much for your very welcome letter that came today. I rejoice that your letters are showing signs of greater understanding and deeper insight as time goes by. You are right in your objection that Rome was not built in a day, but you have to admit that we should build as much of Rome as possible in a day. The fact is, we only have “today.” “Today, if you will hear His voice, do not harden your hearts…” Hebrews 3:7–8. “For we who have believed do enter that rest…” Hebrews 4:3. We must take the kingdom of God by force, which means seizing the kingdom and drawing it to us. Anything that leads to slackness and slothfulness is not of God. The doctrine of Christ leads to godliness. You wrote that you were of the opinion that whoever is born of God cannot be lost. I have heard F. and others speak about this many times. But I have never heard anyone who was able to support it with Scripture. They always quote Jesus’ words in John 17:12, but if you read this verse you will understand at once that He is speaking about His disciples — the eleven. The twelfth was the son of perdition. “While I was with them in the world, I kept them in Your name. Those whom You gave Me I have kept; and none of them is lost except the son of perdition, that the Scripture might be fulfilled.” So this applies to the time He was with them in the world. Read about the son of perdition in the 109th psalm of David. Lot’s wife became a pillar of salt. Solomon was overpowered by his body. Sirach 47:19 [Apocrypha]. He gave his heart to women.

“How wise you (Solomon) became in your youth! You overflowed like a river with understanding.” Verse 14. But he was David’s offspring, so God kept His hand over him all the days of his life. “Solomon rested with his fathers, and left behind him one of his sons, ample in folly and lacking in understanding, Rehoboam, whose policy caused the people to revolt…” Sirach 47:23. This was apostasy.

Now read Romans 8:13. “For if you live according to the flesh you will die.” Not physical, but spiritual death. “Do not quench the Spirit,” and “Do not despise prophecies.” “If anyone does not have the Spirit of Christ, he is not His.” Since we are exhorted not to quench the Spirit, it is obviously possible for the Spirit to be quenched. But when the Spirit is quenched, we do not have the Spirit, and then obviously we don’t belong to Christ. The Scriptures speak about some who had rejected the faith. Since Christ dwells in our heart by faith, we automatically reject Christ if we reject faith. We are saved by hope — Christ in you, the hope of glory. But if we go the way of the world, our hope will be quenched

— and with it, salvation. “For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation which will devour the adversaries.” Hebrews 10:26–27.

So, by sinning willfully, it can go so far that one ends up with a fearful expectation of judgment, despite having previously received the truth. His beloved children have no such fearful expectation, because they have passed from death to life and will not be subject to that judgment.

That should be enough on this subject. Everything I have just written must first be thoroughly refuted before I can go along with the “doctrine” that we can live as ungodly as we please and still be saved. This is the teaching of the Nicolaitans, which Christ hated. It leads people to apostasy and to security in their carnality. We cannot be vigilant enough in watching that Satan does not lull us to sleep with false comfort.

It is a pleasure to see that you have no qualms about simply rejecting what you find to be unscriptural. This is quite right. By so doing you will soon gain more understanding than others your age possess.

You wrote that wisdom doesn’t come raining down all at once. The Spirit of wisdom is down in the depths, dear Aksel, but we are

the ones who must go down to it because, sadly, we are much too “high up” in the first place. “For gold is tested in the fire, and acceptable men in the furnace of humiliation.” Sirach 2:5. Down in this furnace we learn wisdom. From this vantage point “wisdom exalts her sons and gives help to those who seek her.” Sirach 4:11. Those who seek wisdom will find that she meets them in the doorway.

It was also really good to hear that you are fully aware that there is far more to receive from God than what is generally preached.

“My heart rejoices in Jesus alone;

He makes me happy; He is my own.”

I’m sure you think my letters are much too strong and forceful, and no doubt you feel the urge to restrain me. But believe me, it is good to get a clear view of life at the outset, because this will preserve us from many things we might otherwise encounter. God gives growth according to the effective working by which every member does its share. We need each other, because we are members of one another.

God has given the church “some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ.” People also appoint shepherds, evangelists, and teachers, heaping up teachers to please their itching ears.

I am still working for the quartermaster here. We get along well. Now and then I find some who are responsive. I will close for now with a brotherly greeting to you and greetings to everyone at home.

Yours,

Johan





Fredrikstad, September 24, 1905 — # 14


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter. It is good to hear that you are standing firm in faith in those things that are not seen but are yet to be revealed. I am also glad that you are working to draw people to Jesus. That is a glorious work, dear Aksel, a work that will bear fruit for eternity. The world is so empty! Now you understand this yourself.

We are berthed here in Putten at the south end of Krager Island, near Fredrikstad. There are many old ships lying at anchor here. Today we received the good news from Karlstad that the negotiations were successful.* God is good! Praise His name forever! The fate of the nations is in His hands.

I’m sure that L. can be won with goodness. Heaping fiery coals on a person’s head will burn up every conceivable thing. If he would only give his heart to God, he would get new interests in life. Greet him warmly from me. There is no one here I can talk to, but God is with me and gives me a fullness of grace and peace. We often win the most glorious victories during the worst difficulties.

We are promised tribulation in the world, but peace in Him. God’s peace does not consist of persuasive words of wisdom, but of the power of God. The kingdom of heaven consists of power. Jesus means “Savior,” because He shall save His people from their sins. Christ means “Anointed One.” On earth His name is Jesus, but as the resurrected One, Christ. Under the law He is called Jesus, but having triumphed over sin and death He is called Christ. To know Him as Jesus is to know Him as the One who has saved us from our sins. To know Him as Christ is to know Him as the One who has anointed us with His Spirit and His grace. There are different degrees of salvation, as Father wrote in his last letter. But this fact remains hidden until it is revealed to us. “Without Me,” Jesus says, “you can do nothing.” He possesses gifts in abundance. Let us entreat Him for them. Let us be won over by Him. Let us reject everything else in order to win His favor.

Remain steadfast in the Lord, dear Aksel, and He will uphold you and give you wisdom in all that is good. He will take away your appreciation of things that are evil and grant you senses that are exercised to discern between good and evil.

Your devoted brother, resting in Christ,

Johan


* Refers to the successful negotiations that year between Sweden and Norway that led to the dissolution of Norway’s union with Sweden.





Horten, October 15, 1905 — # 15


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace! Thank you for your very good letter, which shows that you are learning to love God and are beginning to feel the emptiness of the world more and more as time goes by.

Every knee shall bow before God, and every tongue shall confess that Christ is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. So you were right when you said that the sooner we bow our knees, the better. The world’s joy consists of satisfying its carnal desires. But these desires are sin. All the sin in the world comes from lust, and the law says: “You shall not lust.” [Norw.] Every transgression of the law is sin; in fact, the law exists only for transgressors. For those who are righteous, the law is superfluous, because the law is just, holy, and good. The righteous man is also just, holy, and good, so the law and the righteous man are one. That’s also why it is written that the one who speaks evil of his brother speaks evil of the law and judges it.

Every word of God can be proved, just like a mathematical formula. The Word can be broken down into its component parts. It cleaves and divides unendingly, even to the division of joints and marrow, and is able to discern the thoughts and intents of the heart.

One thing is of paramount importance: we simply cannot be disciples of Jesus unless we suffer with Him, which means taking up our cross, following Him, and laying down our lives.

The person who can bear to suffer with Christ and for His name’s sake, conquers himself, and thus Satan and all his might. Through suffering, our old “I” is destroyed and our new “I” grows up. This new “I” is full of power. That is why the apostle could say: “I … yet not I.” This is a strange but wonderful way of expressing it; then again, His name is Wonderful, Counselor, and Prince of Peace.

The world and its lusts are nothing; they are emptiness. The pleasures of the world are just a glittering gateway into even greater emptiness.

The things that perish are what the world calls “happiness” — when lust conceives, that is. But once lust has conceived, it brings forth sin; and the one who adds sin to sin is conformed to the image of his father (the devil) — from condemnation to condemnation.

But it is different for us who are in Christ; we are changed from glory to glory by beholding the face of Christ. Satan has no power over us. He reigns in darkness, not in the light. But we are children of the light. Children of the light are invincible. Truth is their watchword and power their battle cry. This process of “dissolution” goes on constantly,* and our senses become exercised in discerning between good and evil. God is a zealous God, so we too become zealous. Zeal is to consume us.

God has determined the limitations of every “power,” and without power, no other powers can be destroyed. There is power in the light, and power in the darkness. We have been delivered from the power of Satan to God. So we see that Satan has power; but when someone stronger enters the house, he binds the strong man and casts him out.

I’m very glad that you have begun on the way that leads to life. God gives grace to the humble. So let us always humble ourselves under the mighty hand of God, so He can exalt us in His time. Let us always give up our self-will and run with joy in the battle set before us, since we know that we are always following the One who has gone before us.

Let us always apply our hearts to understand wisdom, and let us always be adorned with insight. Let us never be the slaves of men; we were bought with a price. Let us make no provision for the flesh, to fulfill its lusts. Rather, let us live as victors over ourselves. God draws everyone to Himself. He wants everyone to be saved and come to the knowledge of the truth. The important thing is never to resist His drawing and His will.

Loving greetings from your brother,

Johan


* Refers to the dissolution of Norway’s union with Sweden.





Horten, November 1, 1905 — # 16


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter today. It was a real joy to read it. More than ever, it contained many truths that are full of insight.

It’s good to think independently. One conclusion leads to another. We gain wisdom through the things we have already experienced, and with this wisdom we draw conclusions concerning things to come.

You spoke about light and shadow. The closer we get to the light, the more sharply defined the shadow becomes. When we are in darkness, there is no shadow; and when we are in the midst of the light, no shadow is cast there, either. We agree about this. But now we ask: What separates the light and the shadow? It is the body of sin, or if you will, Christ on the cross when He was made to be sin for us. And what is the shadow itself? Simply the image projected by Christ on the cross, or the body of sin. And how can we see the light itself? He has prepared a new and living way for us through the veil — that is, His flesh. We know that when an opening appears in the object that casts the shadow, an opening also appears in the shadow. So the shadow gradually disappears as the opening grows.

This brings us to another matter which is well worth considering.

The law is only a shadow of the good things to come and not the very image of those things. The law has been our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. But once we come to Christ, we are not under the law or a schoolmaster; we have entered into a new process, namely: “And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.” We know that we were crucified with Him in order that the body of sin might be destroyed and that we might be made like Him in His death. Now the root itself is to be destroyed! The jurisdiction of the law extended only to sinful acts, but the work of Christ on the cross crushes the very source of these sinful acts — or, as it is called, the body of sin. The law could only pluck the evil fruit from the tree; but what the law was powerless to do, God did when He tore the tree up by the roots.

Now, to go back to the shadow: remember that all the sin a person commits is outside the body. The light can only expose the transgressions that are outside the body, but not the very shadow of the body of sin — isn’t that so? In order to get rid of the entire shadow, we have to destroy the entire body of sin. Then — and only then — will the shadow disappear. Again we see that what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God did when He sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin, and condemned sin in the flesh. The law could condemn sin outside the flesh, but in the flesh it was powerless.

Please write, dear brother, and let me know if you have grasped this precious truth. If you have, then you will also realize that in His grace God has given me insight into the mysteries of Christ. This is my only boast in this world. God’s wisdom is more precious to me than gold and precious stones. I have asked God for insight and understanding, and my prayer has been answered, for He Himself has said through James: “If any of you lacks wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all liberally and without reproach, and it will be given to him.” I rejoice that you have sought the same thing. You haven’t said so explicitly, but I can see from your last letter that the Spirit of wisdom has come upon you. This Spirit is easily recognized by those who possess it. You have made a good choice, dear Aksel. Always obey its counsel and take heed to its promptings, and it will be your precious partner in life.

Now you don’t have to believe just because of what some person has said. Now you have a fountain of wisdom within to draw from. Don’t be afraid of those who oppose you, because wisdom will unravel every matter and put everything on the right track.

God gives me opportunities to speak to people here and there, and I urge them above all else to seek God’s wisdom.

Everything has an opposite, as you said; that is the way God made it. Therefore we must not murmur in tribulation, for we know that tribulation produces perseverance, perseverance character, and character hope; and hope does not disappoint us. A mature man in Christ Jesus has senses that are exercised to discern between good and evil. Before the fall, Adam knew only good, but God knew both good and evil. So we are in a more glorious position than Adam before the fall. Just as a battery has a positive and negative pole, so it is in our spiritual life. The one life decreases in proportion to the increase of the other, and their reciprocal relationship is one of hatred. He who does not hate even his own life in this world cannot be Jesus’ disciple.

God said to Adam, “In the day you eat of it you shall surely die.” Christ had to suffer death for us. He died — that is, His body died. But surely another death also took place in Him, because the body of sin was destroyed and died. Hallelujah! Satan’s head was crushed. Satan can only make contact with human beings through the flesh (the body of sin), but when the body of sin is dead, Satan is also dead — crushed under our feet.

Christ is the wisdom of God. In other words, God has revealed all His wisdom in the work He did in and through Christ. That is why all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge dwell bodily in Christ. The death we are to bear in our body is the death of Christ, and we understand that Christ took upon Himself the cause of death, namely sin. But He was never the servant of sin.

I’ll close for now with a brotherly greeting.

Greetings to those who are at home. Your brother, bound to you in Christ,

Johan





Horten, November 9, 1905 — # 17


Beloved Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus our Lord!

No power can break the bond with which God binds us to the Son. The working of His power within us has eternal life as its aim and object. His ministry in us is that of a mediator so that, little by little, God’s nature can come upon us and into us by the knowledge of Him who called us with a holy calling. The Word of God is not dead but living; therefore, God’s Word can only be spoken by those who are alive. Granted, one who is spiritually dead can grasp with his mind much that is in the Bible, but he cannot speak words that are living. The second Adam became a life-giving spirit — which He would never have become if He had not destroyed sin by death, and destroyed death by life. Therefore, it is essential that His work takes place in us so that sin can be destroyed in us by death, and death by life. This is the only way to fulfill the Scripture that says: “For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus’ sake, that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh.”

It is abominable and very cowardly to whimper and whine when we are faced with losing our life and honor in this world, because losing our life causes true life to break forth, giving us indescribable comfort in tribulation. Satan tempts us to exalt ourselves because of the light that comes from our life in God, but because the element of suffering is present, this temptation has no power over us. Therefore, tribulations are profitable for us. That is why it is written that if we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him.

Knowledge brings pain, but pain keeps us from being proud. When pain has reached its peak, it brings forth death, but death brings forth wisdom. Wisdom is light, and in the light there is life. “Foolish one, what you sow is not made alive unless it dies.” Death is necessary before the knowledge of good and evil can be complete. The fruit of the tree of knowledge does not have its full effect until a death has taken place; and when it has, we have the right to eat of the tree of life and live forever. Christ is the firstfruits, and then those who are Christ’s follow at His coming. Just as Eve was taken from Adam, so we are taken from Christ; therefore we are flesh of His flesh and bone of His bones. Therefore, as the bride of Christ we are to be called “woman,” for we are taken from man. Just as Adam was created first, and then the woman, Christ also became the firstfruits, and then those who are Christ’s at His coming. Just as the firstfruits are hardier than the second fruits, the man is stronger than the woman, and Christ is stronger than the bride. Once again we see that no one can be greater than his master.

Our foremost concern must be that we do not shrink back from the grace of God. To shrink back from grace is to shrink back from obedience and suffering. No creature escapes the fiery furnace. If we don’t enter it voluntarily, we will not receive grace. “Beloved, do not think it strange concerning the fiery trial which is to try you.” When we find the trial hard, it is a comfort to know that we all share the same lot. And we know we have the same lot because: “The same sufferings are experienced by your brotherhood in the world.”

It is invaluable to write about these things. I know, dear brother, that the trial, the fiery trial, lies ahead of you. Don’t despair when He chastens you, and don’t draw back, because He scourges every son whom He receives. Bear the sufferings and trials patiently so that God’s nature can be planted deeply in your consciousness. Then you will not be a superficial person, but rather a pillar in God’s temple. Don’t follow those who are enemies of the cross of Christ, who know nothing of God. Allow God to complete this surgery on the very roots of your heart so that peace, joy, and wisdom can become your eternal possessions.

My testimony in Christ is that I hate myself. Since I can neither live to myself nor die to myself, I’ve committed the matter into God’s hands.

Zeal is the power that drives us on in the knowledge of Christ. Those who sleep, sleep at night. Therefore, those who are children of the day must work as long as it is called “today.” We must work out our salvation with fear and trembling, ever mindful that it is God who works in us both to will and to do of His good pleasure. Our part is to be obedient to the voice of God. This is the only way we can work out our salvation. This work is the fruit of faith as opposed to the works of the law, which are bondage.

Greetings to those who are at home.

Your brother, sharing in the same trial, hope, and sanctification,

Johan





Horten, December 12, 1905 — # 18


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your welcome letter. God is with us both in prosperity and in adversity. He comforts us with His comfort to an eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord. Even in the most pitiable circumstances He is there, and in the most blessed circumstances, He is there also. God in man is Christ Jesus, but God outside of man cannot be comprehended. The Son has revealed the Father, and the Father is revealed in the Son. The Son became the Son of Man in order that He might destroy the humanness of man, and He is the Son of God in order that He might bring forth the God-like man. As human beings we have an affinity for nature; but since there is something even better, we must let go of the things we like best in order to lay hold of and cling to that which is eternal and divine. Sin is self-will. Self-will is a will outside of God’s will. God is not the head of one’s self-will; one sets oneself up as head. This is what the devil did. He withdrew with all his glory and gloried in himself instead of in God. This was sin. He separated himself from God, and since God is not divided, he ended up outside of God and in himself. Instead of beholding his glory in God, he admired his glory in himself. God’s will was that Adam should not eat of the fruit of the tree, but Adam discovered another will and established a foundation outside of God. He became conscious of himself and began to admire himself. That’s also why he discovered his nakedness, which he did not notice as long as he only beheld God.

Transformation into the image of God takes place when we surrender our self-will and become absorbed in God’s will. When this happens, the One whose will we obey becomes our Head, and we are in the kingdom where God’s will is done — the kingdom of heaven. In this kingdom we have a good conscience, because only His will is done. All our own honor and all self-love is outside of God; these only serve to exalt the ego. God is a whole — one entity — and He is not at variance with Himself. Therefore, any party in conflict with another party is not of God, unless the one party is contending in God against the other party, who is in the power of darkness.

I hear you are reading the epistle to the Romans. Justification apart from works of the law is clearly explained there, but there is also much that is difficult to understand. The law came that sin might be made manifest. If our best works are like filthy rags, just imagine what the worst ones are like! So we can’t gain anything that way. But when we completely surrender to God and allow Him to work in us both to will and to do, the will of God will be done. When I think that I am good enough to keep God’s commandments, it is clear that the strength I have is in myself. But when I have given up everything, it is clear that if anything is going to be accomplished, God must do the work and give me His strength. Then when God does give strength, it will be in abundance, because the kingdom of heaven consists of power.

A person who is in bondage to the law has faith in his own ability, and he will be deeply offended if you tell him that he needs to stop believing in himself and come to faith in God. A person who has come to know himself has lost confidence in himself. He has stopped pretending to be a Christian and started living the life of Christ. Others may call him what they will.

Are you dead with Him? In those who are, life is manifested — eternal life. Previously they lived themselves, but now God is their life, for they realized their own life was unworthy. For two-and-ahalf years I labored under the law so energetically that at last I gave up and told God that I just wasn’t able to live like a Christian. To this very day I have not changed my mind about that. Anyone who thinks he can manage to live like a Christian has a very high opinion of himself; actually he’s just a hypocrite. Give yourself a good tongue-lashing. It will give you more joy than you can imagine because, in saying the worst about yourself, you come closest to the truth.

God has given me of the riches of His grace, and that is sufficient. Satan has stretched out his nets, but God has delivered me from all of them. Sometimes people say that I am of the devil, and at other times they say: “Did you ever hear anything so glorious!” But whether they say one or the other, my confidence is in God, who will save me both in honor and dishonor, in evil report and in good report. My testimony in Christ Jesus is that He is my Savior, and Satan is my enemy. My flesh is my enemy, and my desire is to come to a perfect hatred of that flesh. The princes of this world and the children of iniquity grieve my soul and create within it a powerful indignation. The strength of it consumes me in my own zeal. Such is the intensity of my devotion. No one shall rob me of my joy; no one can rob me of my faith; no one can rob me of my doctrine; no one can trample me in the dust; and no one can overpower me in my faith, which is the faith of Christ. If this is boasting, it is the boasting of Christ. If this is honor, it is Christ’s honor. And if this is power, it is the power of Christ. If anyone says that I am boasting according to the flesh, he has little understanding of the power of God.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 13, 1905 — # 19


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your letter, which came today. You write that love is the head of both wisdom and knowledge. I can’t agree with you in this, although I realize you mean it well.

Everything had to be created by God’s wisdom; and when everything had been created, He beheld it and saw that it was good — that’s when love came. So, wisdom is the mother of love, as it’s written in the Apocrypha. God could not manifest His love until there was something to love. But in order to create something out of nothing, it had to be created and shaped by wisdom. God is love, we read. Indeed, He must be explained to us in this way so that we will not be afraid of Him. He draws near to us by love. Even so, we must remember that we are made from the dust of the earth, so wisdom dealt with us before we came to feel the warmth of love.

We agree that love surpasses all knowledge. Knowledge is not life, but wisdom is life itself. It’s written that in Christ all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. That is to say, Christ is the wisdom of God; so that’s not what is meant here. But the wisdom and knowledge to which man has attained is reserved for us in Christ. These are the treasures that moth and rust cannot destroy. Wisdom begets love, for when we get a good look at our own depravity, we’ve taken the first step toward wisdom. This first step has such a powerful effect on us that we automatically forgive and also forget our neighbor’s faults, because we are mindful of how awful we are ourselves. This is how wisdom begets love. Wisdom makes us so happy that we wish everyone else could be happy, too. So wisdom is the mother of love. The love of God causes us to hate and despise ourselves, because our hardness is in such stark contrast to God’s unending love. This knowledge of our own depravity is the first step on the way of wisdom, and as hatred of ourselves increases, this causes us, in turn, to increase in love for love itself.

God is not just the sum total of all good things; He is goodness. We may think that we can lay hold of Him by laying hold of glorious things, but He is not divided, for He is love.

Just these few lines to clarify the difference between wisdom and love. Love is greatly misunderstood. The usual perception of love is that it doesn’t punish evil, that it turns a blind eye to a life that is backsliding into the world and ungodliness. The one who would punish evil is regarded as unloving and contentious. Mrs. X said that she had little love for me because I contradicted her and didn’t regard her to be the prophetess I had heard she was supposed to be. Then I asked her if she had any love for brother Y. No, she didn’t love him, either — at least, not as much as she did many others, although no one in the whole town agreed with her doctrinally as much as he did. Did you ever in all your life hear of such teaching!? I can’t help thinking that this kind of teaching, which results in such a lack of love, is from the devil! When you point these things out to people, they consider you unloving. But doesn’t love rejoice in the truth? We know that we love God because we love the brethren. And yet Mrs. X doesn’t love me, even though she believes I’m a brother! Obviously there must be something wrong in her life, because she can do nothing against the truth — hardly a pleasant state of affairs! Watch out for religion like that. Avoid it.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 19, 1905 — # 20


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your welcome letter.

Thank you for contradicting me when you don’t agree, because in this way we are better able to grasp the matter.

If we are going to ask what is the primary quality in God, we must ask which quality is the first to work toward producing something. Wisdom is saturated with love, so love is not outside of wisdom, but within it. If you take love out of wisdom, all you have left is knowledge. Love does not employ wisdom; rather, wisdom is the regulator of love. Love is a single component, whereas wisdom contains all the components and thus is life itself. It’s possible for a mother to love her child in such a way that she overlooks his faults, to the child’s detriment. But a mother who has wisdom disciplines her child at the right time and in the right way.

We have to make a clear distinction between wisdom and knowledge. Revelation in the knowledge of God is given to each one for his profit, and the knowledge of God is obtained by acknowledging Christ. To admire Him whom we acknowledge produces love. Love, in turn, causes us to keep His commandments, and thus we become wise. Colossians 2:2–3.

God so loved the world that He gave His Son. The love of God goes out to the whole world, drawing all men to Christ (God’s wisdom). No one can come to the Son unless the Father draws him. The Father’s drawing to the Son takes place by a loving conviction of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. When the Son has won our hearts, we can — by the Son — come to the Father, for no one comes to the Father except by the Son. Love draws us to wisdom, because apart from wisdom love can achieve nothing. Sirach says that God loves none but those who cleave to wisdom. No one has known the eternal God except the Son and the one to whom the Son reveals Him. The way through the Son is an education in wisdom; it is the way of chastisement and tribulation. A considerable number of people are “liberated” from this way and this wonderful schooling. They are rejoicing that Christ has suffered everything and that now they are free to live according to the flesh to their heart’s content.

Greet those who are at home, and write soon.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, Christmas Eve, 1905 — # 21


Dear Brother Aksel,

Your very good letters have arrived. It is with great thankfulness in the Spirit, to God our Father through the Lord Jesus Christ, that I think about your total commitment to the will of God. From the day you made a wholehearted personal commitment, you have found a peace that surpasses all understanding. Now you can rest calmly in the anointing and abide in Him, just as the anointing teaches you to do. You have no need to ask about anything, for the same anointing teaches you all things and is true. As you have received Christ, continue to walk in Him. In the beginning you said “yes” to Jesus, but now your strength has ebbed, and you are not even able to say “yes” to Him. But your all is upon His altar, and you are awaiting His fire. He is the way, the truth, and the life. There is no other life. He was born under the law so that He might redeem those who were under the law. The heir, as long as he is a child, is no different from a servant, though he be lord of all; he is under tutors and guardians until the time appointed by the Father. But we are no longer under a guardian, for the law was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. Once we are in Christ, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. Precious deliverance! Now we are in the law of the Spirit of life, which has set us free from the law of sin and death. Blessed is the man who speaks and acts as one who will be judged according to the law of liberty.

A person who has been entrusted with something is judged according to the law of liberty, whereas those who work and serve as slaves are judged according to the law. If anyone sins under the law, he will be judged by the law. If anyone sins without the law, he will be judged without the law. A minor is disciplined by his guardian, whereas an adult is judged by the law of liberty. Christ is born in our hearts while we are still under the law, but He was born under the law to redeem those who are under the law. God can’t give us full liberty all at once, because we haven’t been sufficiently disciplined. That’s why each of us is under a guardian for a period of time determined by the Father. The length of time varies; it depends on when God sees we are ready to possess something ourselves. Some people never come to this point. There will be those who laugh and say, “You fool, don’t you know that Christ was born under the law 1900 years ago?” To such people I would reply, “First the natural, then the spiritual.” Now we are sons, and God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts, by which we cry “Abba, Father.” This Spirit bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of God.

It doesn’t surprise me in the least that you’ve already encountered bitter opposition. Christ has been given to us as a sign that shall be spoken against. As far as “this sect” is concerned, we know that it is spoken against everywhere. Christ came not to bring peace but division, for He will set three against two and two against three in one house.

In Psalm 120:7 it is written: “I am for peace; but when I speak, they are for war.” Here it’s not a question of age, it’s a question of who has the Spirit of the Lord.

Knowing that there are exhortations in Christ, I beseech you, dear brother, to stand fast in the liberty by which Christ has made you free. I’m well aware that there are thousands of instructors in Christ, but not many fathers. Instructors are only interested in pleasing themselves. Both administer discipline, but fathers do so with pain in their hearts and in the hope that comes from love.

I’m unspeakably happy that God has brought you into the anointing and power of His Spirit and bestowed upon you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him. He is a wall of fire around His people.

You can’t force liberty in Christ on anyone. If the time appointed by the Father hasn’t come, you can preach as much as you like, but you won’t be understood. If God were to absolve ungodly people of guilt, they would commit repulsive, abominable things in the land of the righteous. That’s why we must spend time under the law — i.e., our guardian.

It is a tremendous joy to me that you love the truth more than your own life, and that you reject everything that doesn’t stand the test. “You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.”

Let us always remain in our first love, rejoicing with exceeding joy in the hope of the resurrection.

Don’t believe every spirit. Many people are preaching about liberty, but it is the liberty of Satan. If you mention the word “obedience” to them, they bristle with indignation, because to them liberty means freedom to commit sin. Crush and utterly destroy the preaching of such people, and you will have joy in your spirit over a work well done. You must never cower before them.

Remember Saul! He lost his kingship because he wanted to spare the best. Dear Aksel, take what I say in the right spirit. Your calling and election must be confirmed — and shall be, provided that you are obedient to God. Take the example of Balaam as a warning! He was willing to collaborate with ungodly people and to curse God’s elect — all for the sake of gain. Love for God makes us hate the world. Balaam’s and Samson’s kind of love makes things go wrong.

If you want to keep yourself pure, pay heed to these exhortations. But if you bow and scrape to all those who deceive themselves and others into thinking they have liberty, you will defile yourself and lose your peace.

Always abide in Him, and everything will go well.

Yours in Him,

Johan





Horten, December 27, 1905 — # 22


Dear Brother Aksel,

I have some time now, and I want to use it to write to you. You hit the nail right on the head when you wrote about man’s much applauded free will. There is only one will in the kingdom of heaven — God’s will. Every will outside of God’s will is apostasy and sin. Within the bounds of God’s will there is peace, joy, and eternal life. Within these bounds you will find all the saints of God down through the ages. The will of God is our sanctification. In your home you want your will to be done. For those who are living their own lives and doing their own will, the law is in force; but it is powerless against those who possess the life of Christ and the will of God, for the power of sin is the law. When we have come into Christ we are not without law; we are in the law of the Spirit — the law that has set us free from the law of sin and death, “…not being without law toward God, but under law toward Christ.” We are now in the law of the Spirit, which is far more powerful than the law which was our schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. The “convicting” law dealt only with outward deeds, e.g., drunkenness, stealing, fighting, etc. But what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh. The law that convicts of sin is outside the body. That’s why it is written, “Every sin that a man does is outside the body.” But the law of the Spirit is within the body — Christ in you, the hope of glory. The law pointed to the tree’s bad fruit. It could do no more than that. But what the law could not do, the law of the Spirit does by destroying sin within the body. Or, if you will, it kills the tree’s roots. A tree with dead roots stops producing fruit. That’s why it is written, “Knowing this, that our old man was crucified with Him, that the body of sin might be done away with, that we should no longer be slaves of sin.” This is quite clear and straightforward.

Having now passed from the law which brought us to Christ into the law of the Spirit, we’ve come to know Him and the power of His resurrection. Next we begin to experience the fellowship of His sufferings (Philippians 3:10), being made like Him in His death. How wonderful and precious that is! What is “the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings”? It is the suffering that takes place in the roots of the tree as they are being destroyed. To put it another way, it is that suffering which the body of sin undergoes during the process of its destruction. Put this teaching to the test; just see if it doesn’t lead to godliness. This is not a doctrine of my own devising. God has taught it to me, and before His face I commit it to others. Such teaching is costly and precious indeed, but very few people have any knowledge of it at all. This is a true saying: If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. Paul said with tears that many walk as enemies of the cross of Christ. What does it mean to be an enemy of the cross of Christ? It is to fear those sufferings that arise when the body of sin is being destroyed. If we shrink back from these sufferings, we retain our body of sin, just as we would retain a rotten tooth if we were afraid to have it extracted because of the pain.

The kind of person the devil is least able to master is the one who can endure suffering.

The world has only one aim: to look after itself, glorify itself, and please itself. This is what it means to keep one’s life in this world. But those who lay down their life find life — even life eternal.

As you are taught of God, ponder these things earnestly in your heart, so that you never shrink back from the sufferings of Christ. These sufferings have been accomplished in Him, and shall be accomplished in us.

There are multitudes of biblical-sounding expressions going around these days. For example, “Everyone is blessed in his faith,” and “We must give everyone the benefit of the doubt,” etc. These things can be true, provided they are understood correctly. Thus it is written, “To the pure all things are pure, but to those who are defiled and unbelieving nothing is pure.” To say that everyone using these expressions is pure would certainly be overstating the case. But we have to try to understand what people mean by the expressions they use. This will enable us to explain the fallacies. It is a real joy to be a Jew for the Jews; to be as one who is under the law for those who are under the law; to be as one who is without law for those that are without law. Yet we are not without law toward God; we are under law toward Christ.

I’d better stop here. Write soon; it’s always good to hear from you. Greet those who are at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 18, 1906 — # 23


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your good letter. I’m now on board the Tordenskiold as quartermaster. We will be sailing to the Mediterranean.

There are any number of things I could write about, but what we need above all else is the strength and power of the Spirit. Theories about things won’t help us, but God’s power will. Theology is the doctrine concerning God, but God Himself far exceeds any doctrine about Him. Studying God does not give strength; it is growth and development in God that leads to full assurance and power in the Spirit. Strength of heart is better than strong muscles. A peaceful heart is like balm from Gilead.

God has ordained that we should be unclothed. Think of that! Just when we think we’ve laid hold of something, we have become ripe for the peeling back of yet another layer, because every time a layer of “clothing” is peeled back, we become more mature and more sound in the faith.

This is why it is a work of God, and not of ourselves. If it were up to us, we would rather be clothed than unclothed. We would prefer to go from glory to glory without being unclothed. “When you were younger,” Jesus said to Peter, “you girded yourself and walked where you wished; but when you are old, you will stretch out your hands, and another will gird you and carry you where you do not wish.”

To go on in Christ, then, is to be led where we do not wish to go. You are reluctant to leave the “clique” you are in (which I heard T. speak about). It is God we must build upon, and not any group, or clique. Therefore you mustn’t be surprised when one day the whole group breaks up. Hold fast to the Rock, even if an avalanche of stones comes crashing down around you. It is vital to hold unshakably fast when God sends us trials. This is fairly easy as long as what God sends our way is honorable even by worldly standards, which is often the case in the beginning so that we will not become utterly downcast. We feel something quite different, though, when God’s will with us begins to lead us in a direction that is dishonorable in the eyes of the world. Then it’s a question of whose honor we esteem the most, the honor of God or the honor of man. God builds up a work and tears it down in one day, and who dares to ask, “What are you doing?” For God is righteous, even when He takes our life.

Though we may know about all this, we must act as if we knew nothing about it. Therefore, it is good that you have meetings in your home. Work with them in such a way that they know they are loved. Perhaps, when the time of trial comes, you will have won their hearts so that through your steadfastness they will be able to stand. Abide in love with forbearance toward those with whom you have to do. Then your labor in the Lord will not be in vain — either for yourself or for them.

Greet those who are at home, and warmest regards to you, too.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, February 4, 1906 — # 24


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter. Today I’m staying on board. We haven’t received our sailing orders yet, but we expect them any time now. God’s faithfulness is a steadfast support for me in the tribulations, which are so necessary for me. Therefore, I am quite content, for the Lord will deliver me when it pleases Him. In all my duties on board God is allowing things to go well for me, but not too well and not too badly. Too well would make me high minded, but too badly would make me despondent. That’s why all God’s ways are level ways, paved and straight. High-mindedness and faintheartedness are not welcomed by His elect, but humility and power are.

You will do well to press into God’s kingdom and take it by force. Everything must be sacrificed. The heart must be circumcised — completely. All connections with the world are to cease and be cut off. Our eyes and ears are to be shut to the world and open to the things that are above. To be committed into death for Jesus’ sake means the loss of our carnal senses, but then His life will be manifested in our mortal flesh. God’s Spirit never takes any account of carnality and worldly honor. Thus, Christ has become a stone of stumbling and a rock of offense, and all those who believe in His name are conformed to the same image. He is greatest in God’s kingdom who is nothing. On the other hand, he is nothing who would be great.

You are not to be called “teacher,” for One is your Teacher — Christ; but you are all brothers. All these things will fall into place when we receive God’s Spirit in all the power of Pentecost as our life and as the driving force in our life. Otherwise one may preach in such a way that sinners get the forgiveness of sins, but one won’t be able to nurture them so they grow up in Christ. How is it with “the flock”? Can they speak as the oracles of God? Have you all sold everything? Has Christ, the minister of circumcision, circumcised your hearts 360 degrees? Perhaps you would reply like Mrs. X: “I won’t sit still and be cross-examined!” Well, I don’t believe you’ll answer like that, because I have the distinct feeling that you love the truth. It costs something to say from the heart: My all I have laid on Thine altar; I await Thy fire.

I am glad for each and every one who has said “yes” to Jesus — God bless them — I’m definitely not “out to get them.” I only want to remind them that after Israel was saved from Pharaoh and the Egyptians by the Red Sea, they were saved from the wilderness by the Jordan. The fruits of the promised land were more glorious than the manna in the wilderness. But none of that generation entered into the promised land except the two who believed. True, the younger generation did enter in, but they were dead in their fathers, for death was required. But since they personally hadn’t died, Joshua could not bring them into spiritual rest. But Joshua had spiritual rest as a result of his faith, because he didn’t care

whether he looked like a grasshopper in the eyes of the land’s inhabitants. He could only have that attitude because he was dead to himself and his own strength.

The secret of Samson’s strength was his faith. When he let his hair be cut, he was being unfaithful, and his strength vanished. No doubt, it was a fierce battle when he tore apart the lion, but the fruits of victory lay in the lion’s carcass (honey). So we see that after death comes the honey. And what could be sweeter?

Greet those who are at home. And sincere greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 2, 1906 — # 25


Dear Brother Aksel,

May God’s grace and peace strengthen you — body, soul, and spirit! God is our strength, for in quietness and confidence toward Him is our strength.

I hear that you are physically weak — but God will strengthen your body; and that you feel weak in your soul — but God will strengthen your soul. The air at Voksenkollen [a health sanatorium in Oslo] can strengthen neither your soul nor your limbs, but God’s power can. You don’t need to go to Geneva to find respite, for God is near to you in your heart and in your mouth. We don’t need to go to Jerusalem, or to Mount Gerizim either; nor do we need to bring Christ down from heaven or up from the abyss, for truly He is not far from any one of us.

Don’t misunderstand me; your trip to Voksenkollen has undoubtedly shown you that you traveled neither to nor from Christ.

Thank you very much for the 770 kroner you sent me. I hope you won’t be so hardhearted as to deprive me of the fruit that will be mine in the Lord by sending back the amount of interest that has accrued over these past few years. My interest has been more than paid by the profitable use to which you have put the money, as well as by the good heart you’ve had for your brother. The Lord, whose eyes are like flames of fire, will show you mercy on that day, because you let the fruit of your hands benefit others.

So then, permit me to return 210 kroner.

I was afraid you were angry with me since you didn’t write, but that wasn’t the case. I admit that I’m hard and blunt, but God created me this way, and I feel that it is my work in Christ to forge ahead regardless — when it is needed — because in this I find a precious peace and victory. All those who possess something of God will understand that I mean them no harm. I only want to help them break free from the evil spirit or whatever they keep doing wrong. Please write soon.

Greet everyone at home and rest confidently in the Lord, because things are not going to fall apart just because you can’t be everywhere at the same time.

I’m at home now at dinner time, because Pauline gave birth to a daughter yesterday — a big, healthy girl.

Greetings from Pauline and Kristian, as well as from your devoted brother,

Johan





Horten, May 7, 1906 — # 26


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for the card from the boys in Egsheien. May God’s Spirit do His work in them. We are still on board, but will be signing off on the 15th of this month. I hope to get some shore leave then. I was ashore yesterday and had the great pleasure of talking to brother Ellefsen and his wife. They are zealous and are growing in the understanding of God’s ways with them. Love increases as our ability to communicate increases. Our communion with God increases as we mature in life. Christ gave up everything for us, thus showing His love. We show our love for Him by giving up everything in order to win Him. Our life is only a breath in the vastness of the universe, so we ought to make use of our life in the most profitable way. The result of our life is the fullness of spirit we have obtained in Christ by the end of our life in this world. Our riches are the treasures we have gathered in heaven, and the interest on those riches is the number of talents we have been able to amass.

We are exhorted to strive diligently and to renounce sin in all its forms. That which is great in the eyes of the world is an abomination in the sight of God. So don’t allow yourself to look up to what the world thinks is great. You mustn’t let yourself be duped and ensnared by Satan when he comes in silk and satin. You are not to tolerate the spirit of pride; you must crush it. You are not to look up to people who walk in high-mindedness, but despise them in your heart — yet not them, but it. Language is clumsy and unwieldy, but the Spirit is nimble, sharp, and clear. Therefore, language can only describe what one means in the same way that a vague outline can only portray the contours of the real thing. The last time I was in Kristiansand, all of you were suffering from delusions of grandeur. You had been seduced and partly taken captive by a satanic spirit of pride. May the salvation of God eliminate this, too! None of you will come free of it before you have paid the last penny. I hope you will be sensible, Aksel, and reject this madness, because it is those who are lowly and unesteemed in this world whom God has chosen in order to put to shame those who think they are something. Never forget that!

Christ doesn’t suffer from delusions of grandeur. He doesn’t admire satin, silk, flashy clothes, and those who wear a ring on their finger, because all the silver and gold belong to the Lord. Don’t be deceived, dear Aksel; don’t be a fool. Drive them away; pursue them to the uttermost boundaries of the Philistines. If you spare them, they won’t spare you. All the enemies are to be eradicated from the land. Respect of persons in religious circles is of the devil. Flee from those who practice such things. Strike down all that with the sword of the Spirit, for in Christ Jesus neither poor nor rich, neither Jew nor Greek are anything. The only thing that counts is a new creation, and what is of no account is not to be reckoned as though it were something.

It would be interesting to talk to you personally about many things. Greet those who are at home, and hearty greetings to you from your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 26, 1906 — # 27


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your letters. I’ve been spending my days pulling up roots in the garden. Kristian is growing and getting to be a real lion. My youngest, Johanne, doesn’t say too much yet, but she’s a good little girl. I hope you are still zealous and progressing in wisdom and knowledge. Many would-be prophets have predicted that before long I will have to pull in my horns, that I will soon wear myself out, that my zeal will wane, etc. What they probably mean is that soon the devil will overcome me and sleep will set in. This is what those who call themselves Christians have prophesied about me. But praise and glory be to God: my zeal is as great as ever — maybe greater; my horns are as effective as ever, and my power is greater than ever before. So these prophets have prophesied lies. The kingdom of God consists of power, dear Aksel. There is tremendous power in God. Gates of bronze are of no avail, and bars of iron are too weak, for nothing that is formed can resist the One who formed it. God is a warrior against His enemies, and the dread of Him causes sinners to grow pale. I hope that you commit yourself utterly and entirely to Him so that you don’t become a religious buffoon, a religious vagabond, for whom gross darkness is reserved forever. Wake up! Don’t sleep like those who know nothing of God, though they claim they do. You must never imagine that you can please both God and man. God resists such humbug. But from the dust He calls us in His Son. It’s no use trying to pull the wool over God’s eyes. A religious mask is an abomination to Him. He hates lukewarmness, because He Himself is burning with zeal. If we have done all that we ought to have done, we are only unprofitable servants. Complete acknowledgment of the fact that we fall far short will cause us not to fall short in anything. We are vessels of clay, and in those vessels God works both to will and to do; and most often He works in us to speak in such a way that people believe we are mad and possessed by the devil. The thing is, when the devil and madness are so clearly portrayed, people believe that the one who exposes these things is possessed and mad himself. But when one is “converted,” then all such things also become “converted” — i.e., get turned around. My wish is that you would strive earnestly to enter in through the narrow gate. Don’t be stupid and pretend to be free before the law has chastened you to Christ. There are enough people like that as it is. A thorough annihilation precedes everything glorious. You must obey God’s Spirit through thick and thin — even if it cuts you to the quick and you feel like you are about to black out — because this is the way of life. Don’t bother asking religious people for advice, because most of them are on more familiar terms with the flesh and have more experience in the flesh than in the Spirit. Talk about meat and potatoes, and they will feel at home and can reply; but if you go beyond what is tangible, they merely stare open-mouthed, without the foggiest notion of what you are talking about. Therefore, never ask their advice, but go straight ahead in the Spirit; then it will go well with you. If it doesn’t go well, charge it to my account, for with much difficulty God has brought me to obedience; and because of this, God’s power has come over me so that I’m bursting with power in God and would gladly take on whole regiments of Philistines. Greet all those who feel worthy of a greeting in Christ.

Your brother, resting in the Rock of Offense,

Johan





Horten, June 24, 1906 — # 28


My dear Family,

God always gives us someone to speak with; this is also a work in the Lord. There is always someone here or there who would like to talk with us. It’s always a great pleasure to meet such people, because they are few and far between. There has been some real friction between brother X and me, and things had to come to a head. The issue that brought it to a head was this:

Brother X is of the opinion that Jesus, while He was on earth, did not have a will to fight against, as we do. I am of the opinion that He did, but that He was always victorious over it. Everyone is tempted when he is drawn away by his own lust and enticed; Christ, too, was tempted. “Father, not My will, but Yours be done.” Here we see that He had a will that was contrary to God’s will, a will that He denied by the Spirit. “For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned

sin in the flesh.” It was sin in the flesh — in the flesh of Christ — that was condemned. And now this same sin is condemned in all flesh. That’s why the world is convicted of judgment, because the prince of this world has been judged in this flesh.

Brother X says that Jesus was tempted from without, and that sin was laid upon Him from without. This sounds appealing, and most people have just such an understanding before they have thought much about it. Nevertheless, Christ was of the seed of the woman, and as such, He had something within Himself to deny. He was obedient unto death, the death of the cross. “Though He was a Son, yet He learned obedience by the things which He suffered. And having been perfected, He became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey Him.” Obedience implies self-denial. And where there is self-denial, there is sin, because the one who has no sin has nothing to deny. Sin in the flesh must be conquered, and this happened in the body of Christ, for no guile was found in His mouth. There is much to be said about this. In Hebrews 4:15 it is written that Christ was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin. This tells us that He did not commit sin; He was faithful in temptation. But in order to be tempted as we are, He had to have the same flesh; otherwise He could not have been tempted like we are.

The law could only address sin outside the body, but Christ overcame sin in the body. Therefore, our bodies belong to the Lord. He was wounded for our transgressions; the chastisement was upon Him so that we could have peace. And yet, whether I slay one or a thousand, I have only one life to lose. So it is with Christ. He suffered what a physical body could suffer, but one body couldn’t take upon itself the sufferings of several people. On this point many err. James and John were to be baptized with the same baptism and to drink the same cup as Christ.

If we picture a flock of sheep hemmed in by four stone walls, and imagine that one of the sheep breaks a hole in the wall and escapes, we also realize that in so doing, this one sheep has opened the way for all the others to escape through the same hole. But if there should be a stubborn goat among them who isn’t willing to go exactly the same way, it will have to die right where it is. If there are some who don’t believe that there is an opening, they too will have to die in their captivity. In this way Christ has become the door of the sheepfold, and each and every one of us is obliged to go through Him. This is how He is the Savior of the whole world. We have access through the veil — that is, His flesh. Now we can better understand why He is able to call us brothers.

“Therefore, as through one man’s offense judgment came to all men, resulting in condemnation, even so through one Man’s righteous act the free gift came to all men, resulting in justification of life.” One doesn’t glorify Christ by presenting Him as one who was not like us. Christ voluntarily became sin for us. He didn’t count it robbery to be equal with God, but humbled Himself and became like us.

The work of Christ is a deep work, one that angels desire to look into. It is hardly surprising that we understand only a little of it at a time. My understanding is that Christ was reckoned as a transgressor and died as one — not as all — so we may judge thus: if one died for all, then all died. In just the same way, one sinned for all.

Access to the same way is open to everyone — He is the way. “To God the Lord belong escapes from death.” Through the death of the One, there is access and escape from death for all. Everyone who wants to be saved must share the same baptism and drink of the same cup. That’s why this death is called “the death of Christ.” This death (gateway) must be passed through, but no one passes through until he has paid the last penny.

Kristian, Johanne, Pauline, and I are all doing well. My fondest greetings to you all.

Your son and brother,

Johan





Horten, July 1, 1906 — # 29


My dear Family,

I want to thank you, Father, for your good letter of June 26, which tells me that you are also of the understanding that Christ had a human will to overcome, but that He was always victorious over it. We have the Spirit of Christ, and it is the same for us in this regard as it was for Him. From this we may conclude that He had the same things to fight against as we do. This is the Spirit that has overcome the world, for He who is in you is stronger than he who is in the world. With this Spirit we will be more than conquerors. God requires absolute, unconditional obedience and subjection to His will. By being clay in His hands we receive an amazing power and fullness. This power vanishes if we reserve the least little bit for ourselves. The anointing of the Spirit gives us strength and steadiness in our work. But no sooner does a person begin to admire something in the world, or have something that he is not willing to give up, than he becomes unfit as an instrument of God. Such a person is only a wreck in this world. The whole world lies in the power of the evil one. Therefore it is imperative that we abide in Him, as the Spirit has taught us.

The apostles had a great deal of knowledge, but they were enjoined not to take up their ministry before they had been clothed with power from on high. Even Jesus Himself had to be endued with power from on high before He could begin His work. I have never understood as I do now the necessity of being cautious and abiding in the anointing of the Spirit. For I see many who have lost their way because they have become sidetracked by one thing or another. There are many sidetracks, but only one “way.” God has preserved me in the anointing of His Spirit until today, and God’s power is upon me just as it has been from the time I came to faith. Esau despised his birthright and Samson his hair. They were unfaithful to their consecration to God. Esau was consecrated from birth, and Samson’s hair was long because of his Nazarite vow. But he despised this divine vow, and his strength disappeared. If we despise the leading of the Spirit and are not totally obedient, then we too break the bands of the covenant — the bands of promise — and the strength disappears, returning to the One who gave it. If we want to have our strength back, we must let our hair grow, as it were — let those bands that were broken be joined again; then our strength will return. God is very exact. Christ had to go the way, and the Spirit will lead us just the same way. Can anyone imagine anything more radical than this?

Yesterday I bought a book entitled: The Baptism of the Holy Spirit, by R. A. Torrey, translated from English. It’s a good book; I highly recommend it. It’s very readable and easy to understand, and it contains many precious teachings. The author explains how we receive power (the baptism of the Spirit), how this power works, and how it can be lost. This is all explained simply, concisely, and effectively, without beating around the bush.

There are many things we must take heed to. Most religious assemblies are so dry! Why is this? Because the power and the anointing of the Spirit are gone. Those who can speak God’s Word with power and authority are few and far between. God’s Word has authority in itself, for the Lord is lord. One who is lord uses authority — all the more so as there is only one Lord — one baptism, one God, the Father of all. The baptism of the Spirit, Torrey writes, is one thing; but if we are to carry out a work, a special outpouring of the Spirit is required. After the apostles had been baptized in the Spirit on the Day of Pentecost, they experienced what the Bible calls being “filled with the Holy Spirit.” That is to say, they received power to carry out the task that lay before them. Torrey also writes that a person can be born again and not have been baptized in the Spirit. That was my own experience, too. Jesus was also born of God before He received the baptism of the Spirit for power to minister — just like the apostles, Apollos, and those who came from Samaria. Torrey writes that the baptism of the Spirit doesn’t destroy our sinful nature, as some teach, and he is quite right.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, October 15, 1906 — # 30


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your two postcards. We are all doing well, and I hope you are, too. You haven’t been as zealous a letter writer as you were in the beginning; perhaps you aren’t as zealous as you once were. Zeal causes us to be fully established in hope. God is a zealous God. Tribulations and adversity of all kinds will come, to be sure, but tribulation produces perseverance, and perseverance character, and character hope; and hope does not disappoint. In other words, everything works together for good to those who fear and love God. But to be a disciple of Jesus is a life of denying ourselves and taking up our cross. And yet He will not allow us to be tempted beyond what we are able to bear. God’s thoughts concerning us are thoughts of peace, and His ways are not always our ways. It can hurt to give up our own way in order to obediently follow God’s way, especially when we have the option of drawing back. But the Lord says: “If anyone draws back, My soul has no pleasure in him.”

“The Lord tries His own; they are tested by fire,

But none of them will He forsake or despise.

The trials that you dread and that you least desire —

Just these are true blessings, dear friend, in disguise.”

Trials are blessings in disguise; that’s a fact. One who would minister in the church must first be tested. If he is found faithful, then he may serve. Gold is refined in the fire, and acceptable men are tried in the furnace of humiliation. Being agile means being able to move downward just as well as upward.

The one who hankers after what the world regards as great is rigid, fettered, and inflexible. But the Spirit of wisdom is agile and makes those who receive it agile as well. For God takes notice of the insect crawling in the dust by the country road just as surely as he does of the king in his palace. There we can see what liberty really is. Think, to despise people who are created in God’s image, because in blindness we imagine that we can climb higher by treading on those who are lower. On the contrary, by humbling ourselves and going lower, we get a sound understanding from the ground up. And with this as a foundation we are competent to appraise the highest peaks, because the foundation of these peaks is the common people. Every tower must have a base upon which to stand. We should always make it a point to practice strict self-criticism and self-control in the light of God’s Spirit. By so doing, we will become an impregnable fortress and a vessel for honor, sanctified and useful for the Master. We should always see to it that we are irreproachable, for this is what it means to overcome evil. All sin is in the world on account of lust. When lust has conceived, it gives birth to sin; when sin is full-grown, it brings forth death. Therefore, we must conquer our lusts and live in the Spirit. The one who yields to the lusts of his flesh is of the world and fulfills the desires of the flesh and of the mind. Such a person sows to his flesh and will of the flesh reap corruption.

Just these few lines to give you something to think about and to give you some comfort — if you are within the range of comfort, for God is a God of comfort.

Greet those who are at home, and the best of greetings to you, too. Write and let me know how you’re doing. Don’t be afraid to speak out; I’m not going to bite your head off. But hypocrisy is of the devil.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, October 19, 1906 — # 31


Dear Brother Aksel,

Jesus says: “Make friends for yourselves by unrighteous mammon, that when you fail, they may receive you into an everlasting home.” Luke 16:9. This tells us that we are to make friends by means of earthly goods (the “unrighteous mammon”), and thus win them for the eternal habitations. (The “righteous mammon” is Christ.) This is a right way of using the unrighteous mammon. Nevertheless, our aim when we make friends by the unrighteous mammon should be to bring them into everlasting habitations and not make a lot of friends who only admire us personally; that wouldn’t be profitable. The confidence that has been created by sharing one’s earthly goods should be used to point toward the treasures that can be gathered in heaven, where moth and rust do not corrupt and where thieves do not break in and steal.

I can’t understand why the family keeps asking whether they may come. There’s no need to ask at all. Whoever wants to may simply come. We are not running a hotel here, but I believe that what we do have is solidly grounded. For I have endeavored, by God’s grace, to build my home on a foundation of righteousness so that the Lord’s blessing will not depart from it. It is sheer blasphemy to hang up a wall plaque that says: “God Bless Our Home” when that home is full of things acquired through unrighteousness. Everyone who practices righteousness is righteous, just as He is righteous. Pauline thinks I’m being too harsh in what I write, but the truth is that I cannot do otherwise. All those who want to have dealings with me will have to bear with me as I am. One uses a brush for brushing, a hammer for hammering, an axe for chopping, and a saw for sawing. The functions of the axe, the hammer, the saw, and the brush are not interchangeable; neither can we, as many as are in Christ, exchange ministries — a little comfort and balm amidst the harshness.

Hearty greetings to you from Pauline, Kristian, and Johanne, as well as from your devoted brother,

Johan





Horten, November 19, 1906 — # 32


Dear Brother Aksel,

While I was writing the date, it occurred to me that our late sister Anna would have been 38 years old today. She’s been dead for 23 years and 5 months now. That’s how it goes with all of us. We’re here for a moment, and then we pass from this earth.

I want to thank you for your letter which I received today. I see that the law — the schoolmaster — has had the effect of stopping your mouth. You have come to see the hollowness and the emptiness, despite the fact that your sins have been forgiven. You are unable to live like a Christian. Again and again you fall short, and my sincere wish for you is that you will soon be bankrupt, because it is those who declare bankruptcy who are in need of grace. My “I” cannot live and keep the commandments, but the law was given so that every mouth might be stopped and the whole world might be declared guilty before the judgment seat of God. The law chastens us to Christ. But once we are in Christ, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. Through the death of Christ every man has received a “Certificate of Incompetence,” and all our best works are like filthy rags; for the Spirit testifies against everything we can achieve according to the flesh. Only after we have acknowledged that we really are what the Spirit testifies we are can the Spirit take possession of our earthen vessel. If we are dead with Him, we believe that we shall also live with Him. We mustn’t be content with just the forgiveness of sins. If that is all we have, we continue to sin again and again, because forgiveness is only a cleansing from committed sins. If we want to live a pure and undefiled life, we have to have the Spirit, which you and your friends have been praying for. But neither you nor your friends will ever receive God’s Spirit if you don’t surrender yourselves completely to that same Spirit in order to be led by Him. For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the children of God. The Spirit leads us in such a way that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled, for the Spirit is not in conflict with Himself. You thought you had this anointing from the beginning, but you say yourself that you were mistaken.

Nearly everyone says they have the Spirit, so they can’t pray for what they believe they already have. However, it is only when we have become empty and devastated that the Spirit comes. One does not have faith as long as one is under the law. Galatians 3:12. The law has nothing to do with faith, but: “The man who does them shall live by them.” “The law?” some will say. “We’ve never been under the law.” But that’s exactly where we have been, for all flesh is dead in the death of Christ, and the Spirit testifies against everything we try to do according to the flesh. This is the law written on the fleshly tables of our heart. Under this law it is possible to slave away to our heart’s content! The work of Moses and the prophets is continued in Christ, for He came not to destroy the law, but to fulfill it. “But before faith came, we were kept under guard by the law, kept for the faith which would afterward be revealed.” Galatians 3:23.

The children of Israel were unable to enter the promised land because of unbelief. But we who believe enter into rest. The land was full of fierce giants from many tribes, yet all of them were to be conquered by faith in the power of God. Most believers wander aimlessly in the wilderness all their lives. They subsist on the daily manna; they often murmur and long for the fleshpots of Egypt. But they rejoice again when they happen upon an oasis in the wilderness. Up and down they go — back and forth. But the promised land is a land flowing with milk and honey, and in faith we can march around the walls of Jericho shouting “Hallelujah.” The walls that the enemy relied on will crumble, and he will flee for his life. In this way we can move on from one city to another. But we must beware of one thing: we must never bury any Babylonian garments or treasures. For in the promised land our hearts must be circumcised from every kind of fleshly lust. There is no going back across the Jordan; we’ve burned all our bridges behind us, and the Jordan is overflowing all its banks — only onward, onward.

“Though you slave away,

Yet unchanged you stay;

Cross over the Jordan today.”

You’ve reached a gratifying conclusion. You say that you’ve clenched your fists in your pockets. That’s a good sign. Personally, I’ve clenched my fists and beaten the air so many times that if anyone had seen me they surely would have thought I was out of my mind.

Neither circumcision nor uncircumcision is of any value — only a new creation. For the one who walks according to this rule: peace be upon him and upon the Israel of God. Therefore, let us not walk according to any other rule.

I look forward to hearing soon that you have received the anointing.

When it comes, you will receive instruction, and the Bible will become a new book. But you will also experience opposition, for Christ has been given to us as a sign that shall be spoken against

— a rock of offense and a stone of stumbling. So from now on let us know no one according to the flesh. The one who does God’s will is our father and mother and sister and brother. This is the new dispensation that has been established in the end times. Job was a godfearing man, but he had to be crushed.

All of us here greet you heartily, and my wish is that you might soon receive what you have been praying for. You will receive it the very moment you surrender totally. David says: My all I have laid on Thine altar; I await Thy fire.

Greetings to those who are at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 28, 1906 — # 33


Dear Brother Aksel,

I got your postcard. Thank you so much. About a year and a half ago you mentioned in another postcard that you had said “yes” to Jesus. Now you are telling me that Jesus has said “yes” to you. I understand quite well what you mean, though if one were to explain it in its fullest sense, it would be a long story. I rejoice over your first “yes,” but am rejoicing even more over the second one. These two “yeses” notwithstanding, I know that in Him there is not “yes” and “no”; in Him there is only “yes.” His “yes” has unquestionably been there all the time, but we haven’t been mature enough to lay hold of it.

The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and death. The law has done its work — chastened us to Christ; but after we come to Christ we are no longer under a guardian. Yet we are not without law, for then we would be like wandering stars (this is Antichrist). But we look into the perfect law of liberty and continue in it; then we are not forgetful hearers but doers of the work. James 1:25. No one comes to this by himself, but we are under guardians and stewards until the time appointed by the Father. Galatians 4:2. “But when the fullness of the time had come, God sent forth His Son, born of a woman, born under the law, to redeem those who were under the law, that we might receive the adoption as sons. And because you are sons, God has sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying out, ‘Abba, Father!’ Therefore you are no longer a slave but a son.” Galatians 4:4–7. But we have this exceedingly great power in earthen vessels, so that all the glory might be God’s alone, and not ours.

Please read 1 Kings 8:10–12. “And it came to pass, when the priests came out of the holy place, that the cloud filled the house of the Lord, so that the priests could not continue ministering because of the cloud; for the glory of the Lord filled the house of the Lord. Then Solomon spoke: ‘The Lord said He would dwell in the dark cloud.’ ”

The same thing happens today in the house of the Lord, whose house we are. When the glory of the Lord fills us, the priest with all his works must leave in haste. This is salvation from dead works. We become earthen vessels, and an earthen vessel is made of dark material. This is why it is written that the Lord will dwell in thick darkness. He will dwell there because He will not share His glory with us. If the work is His and not ours, it would be unjust of Him to share the glory with us. This is the righteousness of faith. It is so thorough that all patchwork and all “priest-work” from our side must simply vanish once the glory of the Lord fills His house.

You refer to 2 Chronicles 20:12: “O our God, will you not judge them? For we have no power against this great multitude that is coming against us; nor do we know what to do, but our eyes are upon you.”

Yes, it is good to feel powerless in the battle, for then the Lord fights for us. See the same chapter, verses 13–17. “Thus says the Lord to you: ‘Do not be afraid nor dismayed because of this great multitude, for the battle is not yours, but God’s.’ ”

You won’t need to fight in this battle. Position yourselves, stand still, and see the salvation of the Lord.

I’ve thought much about coming to Kristiansand between Christmas and New Year. I would enjoy speaking with you and the others. I’ll just have to see how things work out. The Lord, who has now given you the peace which passes all understanding, is also mighty to preserve you blameless until that Day.

It would be a real joy to hear from you right away. Greet those who are at home, and greetings to you from your brother, kept in Christ Jesus,

Johan





Horten, November 30, 1906 — # 34


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your letter today just as I was about to leave for the office. It was with some apprehension that I opened it, but on reading it my heart was overwhelmed with joy, and I couldn’t keep back the tears. I thank God and praise His holy name because in His grace He has also bestowed upon you this holy gift which is mighty to satisfy all our needs in rest. Great is this mystery of godliness: Christ manifested in the flesh. “If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness.” The voice is Jacob’s, but the hands are Esau’s. The inward man needs to grow, and the outward man must perish. Song of Solomon 1:5: “I am dark, but lovely, O daughters of Jerusalem, like the tents of Kedar, like the curtains of Solomon.” The earthen vessel is dark, but the treasure inside the vessel is lovely. 1 Kings 8:12. “Then Solomon spoke: ‘The Lord said He would dwell in the dark cloud.’ ” (Formerly He lived in tents.) It has been said that the tents of Kedar were made of a cloth produced from black hair.

Christ became a minister of the circumcision for the sake of God’s truthfulness. He circumcises our hearts and burns all our bridges so that we may truly experience that the only thing that counts is a new creation in Christ. The old things have passed away; everything has become new.

I hardly know what to write to you now, since you have God’s anointing yourself, and the anointing will teach us all things and remind us of what Jesus has said. “He will take of what is Mine and declare it to you.” It is certainly no mean storehouse He draws from either, Christ Himself being the source of supply; for Jesus sanctified Himself in order that we might truly be holy. How amazing are God’s ways with us! He leads us down — deep down, and He lifts us up. He lets us test our own strength on the holy commandments of the law so that we might realize how incapable we are of doing any good thing at all. He does this so that we might come to know our sin, but where we come to know sin, we come to know grace even better. When we were in the flesh we bore fruit for death, but now we’ve passed from death to life, that we might bear fruit to life eternal. The mind of the Spirit is life and peace; the mind of the flesh is death. As many as are led by the Spirit are sons of God. But the Spirit leads us in the spirit of the law, and so the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. Romans 8:4. Just as Christ became for us justification, He will also become for us sanctification and finally, redemption — provided we walk in the Spirit.

Knowing that there are exhortations in Christ, I want to remind you of 1 John 2:24: “Therefore let that abide in you which you heard from the beginning.”

I greet you in Christ with Proverbs 4:10 and the rest of the chapter. Take these words carefully to heart. Now you have peace, the peace which passes all understanding, but if you want to hold onto this peace, you must be prepared for war. Put on the helmet of salvation; gird your waist with the truth; take the sword of the Spirit; have your feet shod with the preparation of the gospel; and above all, take the shield of faith, with which all the fiery darts of Satan must be quenched. Thus equipped, you will be prepared to meet every kind of enemy. Even the large crowd you spoke of, that came against you, will have to retreat when confronted with such an array of weaponry. For, as it says in Proverbs 25:26: “A righteous man who falters before the wicked is like a murky spring and a polluted well.” You have no right to give in! We can be friendly toward our opponents, as it is written, but we must never give in to them. Jesus overcame, and we shall overcome.

Greet your friends who have the same precious faith. May God give all of you grace and progress in liberty so you may look into the perfect law of liberty and continue in it, because then we become, not forgetful hearers, but doers of the work. He is mighty to keep you blameless until that Day.

John writes in a number of places that he no longer wanted to write with pen and ink, but that he hoped soon to be able to speak with his readers face to face. Perhaps God can do this for me as well; yes, I know He can. His will be done in this matter, too.

Proverbs 20:6: “Most men will proclaim each his own goodness, but who can find a faithful man?”

I’ll close now by asking you to greet those who are at home. Let me say again how unspeakably glad I am that by God’s grace you have entered into rest in Him. We who believe enter into rest.

Your brother active in rest and duty-bound in liberty,

Johan





Horten, February 17, 1907 — # 35


My dear Family,

Thank you for your letter, which just came. It has been a long time since I last wrote. I want to relate briefly how things have gone with Aksel and us here.

Aksel arrived from Oslo and stayed with us about eight days. God used him to greatly bless, and to strengthen the brothers and sisters in their faith. He received the gift of tongues, and he praised God in tongues. We had several regular meetings, as well as prayer meetings, and the power was so much in evidence that my heart is filled with joy at the mere thought of it.

Aksel will soon be arriving in Kristiansand, filled with the Holy Spirit and power. May God bless his entrance among you! Believe God, and He will do great things. Continue in prayer and supplication.

I’m writing this letter in order to prepare you to receive Aksel with simplicity of heart, because he isn’t coming with something of himself, but with the gospel and teachings of Christ.

Sincere greetings to everyone who has an open heart for the truth. Just these few lines to encourage you in the Lord.

Your brother battling together with you in Christ,

Johan





Horten, March 5, 1907 — # 36


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter, received today. We have been rejoicing all day long, thinking about God’s mighty works among you. Pauline has read your letter over and over again, and it has been read by a number of others, as well.

How wonderful it was to hear about brother X! I can’t help thinking that if things continue like this, the days of the apostles are beginning all over again. And why not? The same conditions prevailed then as now. Here in Horten we have also had the honor of being evil spoken of. Recently we were in the newspaper — though we weren’t mentioned by name — for having spoken in tongues in the Methodist church. After finishing his sermon, the pastor gave liberty for two or three in the congregation to pray. So it wasn’t as though there was any glaring violation of the proper order of things in what we did — on the contrary. That morning he had spoken about the baptism of the Spirit, and in the afternoon he was to speak about the spiritual gifts; so it was only fitting that he should hear them exercised — despite the fact that his attitude was rather hostile. In any case, what people think is of no consequence, provided what is done is consistent with the Spirit of wisdom and revelation.

I wish all of you an abundant fullness of the blessings of Christ. The Spirit testifies of tribulation. Stand firm, because after the initial surprise wears off, indignation sets in; and when it does, it sets in with a vengeance! Not a hair on your head will be lost. Let Satan rage. His perspective is not so very broad, because he only has a sense for what is human. The gates of hell shall not prevail against you!

I just received a letter from Father. Hallelujah for what God has done in him! May God’s abundant blessing fill Mother from head to toe! We wept here when we heard that she was praying for the fullness of the Spirit. We will be praying for her and pressing in to God with all our might. I hear that Father was spoken of in a contemptuous manner in one of the local daily newspapers. Fear not, my dear Father. Persevere. You will get your honor back again — with interest! My heart is burning within me.

Special greetings to Mother. Greet everyone at home, and hearty greetings to you, too, from all of us here,

Johan





Horten, March 18, 1907 — # 37


Dear Brother Aksel,

I have received your letters, and it has been a great joy both for me and for us all to hear how it’s going with you. Sharing the same battle for the same cause, and also the disgrace that comes with it, strengthens unity and brotherhood.

Friday evening we had a little meeting here. Two strapping sailors, who were both married men between 26 and 28 years old, and who had given their hearts to Jesus about three weeks ago, received the Spirit of God and began to speak in tongues. They went home that evening arm in arm, overflowing with joy. God is blessing us in such marvelous ways in these prayer meetings that people ask to be allowed to attend. Things are done strictly according to the laws of the Spirit, and the power is so mightily present that I feel something is bound to happen.

I hear that you’ve had a clash with X. Yes, such settling of accounts leads to a thorough “spring cleaning” in the deepest chambers of the heart and produces a clean and pleasant fragrance. Cowardice is the worst kind of leaven we can meet up with. True courage brings true peace and instills respect in our opponents, so that it will be for us as it was for David: God makes all our enemies around us be at peace with us. They leave us in peace not because they feel sorry for us, but because they don’t want to taste the edge of our sword. A peace based on the enemy’s fear of war is delightful. Such peace surpasses all understanding. The peace which is protected by the helmet of salvation and the breastplate of righteousness — with sword in hand — is precious indeed. All other peace is not true peace, for then we fall prey to whoever wants to devour us.

It’s amazing how little knowledge many of those have who write letters to the editor of the daily newspapers. My heart burns within me when I see such stupendous ignorance putting on a dignified face in the midst of all their stupidity. David says: “My heart burns within me because Your enemies do not have Your word abiding in them.” When such people rise up as enemies, that’s like a pile of paper vaunting itself against a fire.

It would really be good to have a talk with X. He is sharp, and that’s what it takes. Nothing ever comes of those who go around preaching peace, peace, quietness, quietness, love, love. A bucket of cold water is the only thing that can wake such people up. Jesus said that He had come to cast fire on the earth. There are enough people running around with a hose trying to put it out. Let us therefore be all the more zealous to light fires all over the place.

It would be very useful if a proper explanation of the gift of tongues and its intended use could be published. May God give wisdom in this matter so that some of the misunderstanding may be cleared up among those who have begun on the way. We won’t make any headway explaining such things to the world, so it’s pointless even to try.

Hearty greetings to you and to those who are at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, March 19, 1907 — # 38


My dear Family,

May God’s peace, which surpasses all understanding, keep your hearts and thoughts in Christ Jesus!

My cup is running over with pure joy, for God has filled me. I’m never happier than when I can sit by myself in peace and quiet and let the Spirit work. What a delight it is! The kingdom of God does not consist of words, but of power. I’m not boasting; I speak the truth when I say that the power within me is so strong that I feel like I’m about to burst. This is my personal testimony in Christ Jesus.

The important thing now is to keep ourselves pure — not to be a hypocrite, not to be a coward, but to do our utmost to see that the cross of Christ is held in high esteem. We mustn’t quench the Spirit, and we mustn’t grieve the Spirit, for that would be the same as grieving ourselves. We are to be courageous, advancing ruthlessly against all idols, and not sparing the high places. There is no retreat — only forward, ever forward. Everything must give way before us; everything must be conquered. Everyone must get the feeling that it’s useless to put up any resistance, for all fortresses must fall by faith, and faith alone. God concealed nothing from His friend, Abraham, and He conceals nothing from us when we are taken into His secret counsels. Think, to sit in the counsels of God! That is certainly greater than having a seat on the city council or being a member of parliament! We shall be taught how to govern in God’s administration here on earth. For this is a government so great that all earthly governments are but shadows and mere images of it.

With sorrow I have watched brother X accompanying first the one and then the other to various meetings here and there. They are dragging him along in order to attract people to their meetings, but I fear that his strength will be sapped if he keeps letting himself be led around by the nose that way. Balak took Balaam by the ear, so to speak, and dragged him along, because Balaam had the gift of prophecy. We must be on our guard in such matters.

May God give us wisdom in all things, so that we can sit in the secret counsels of God and have insight and discernment in every situation. Our proper place is outside the camp, where we can act independently. We can’t let anyone lead us around by the nose; rather, we are to lead them by the nose if they don’t want to follow on the way (Jesus).

Outside the camp, with God alone, we can hear and understand what the Spirit is saying. We must cut off all camp dwellers from our flesh, otherwise we will become just as powerless as they are. It is imperative that we pay heed to this. If we do go into the camp, we must go in with words the Lord has spoken to us outside the camp. We must conduct ourselves with authority and without wavering. We must chasten, guide, and encourage them — without getting cozy; otherwise we will become one flesh with them. On the contrary, we are to cleave to the Lord and be one Spirit with Him. If we understand this and act accordingly, our power will increase, and our enemies will fear us and keep their distance.

Greetings to all of you in Christ.

Your son and brother in the Lord — outside the camp,

Johan





Horten, April 5, 1907 — # 39


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your good letter of April 1; thank you very much. It is always a pleasure for us to hear from you all. We plan to have a meeting in my home tomorrow evening. Our meetings have been glorious, and I hear yours have been, too. These days there is certainly a need for the exhortation Paul gave to Timothy: “Preach the word! Be ready in season and out of season. Convince, rebuke, exhort, with all longsuffering and teaching.” 2 Timothy 4:2. For it will become evident that a work needs to be done in the flock. It’s not just a question of getting converted, and that’s that. The lambs and the sheep have to be fed, as Jesus earnestly exhorts Peter to do. Not everyone is an evangelist; some are prophets, pastors, and teachers. Everyone must attend to his own particular task. Not every brother and sister has a prominent ministry, yet they are members of the same body. A servant of Christ must first be tested to see if he is faithful; afterward he may serve in the church. As you pointed out, there are undoubtedly many things that need to be “shorn off,” and here we need wisdom from God. This is a most important work that needs attending to. This is the church of the living God, and He has entrusted us with its oversight. We are to guard it from the wolves, from the leaven of the Pharisees and the Sadducees, and to watch over it so that it can receive nourishment. May we receive this testimony on that day, regarding this very difficult work: “Well done, good and faithful servant.”

It’s always good to be fully conscious of our task. Not that we rejoice over the work itself, but over the fact that we can attend to it with a proper understanding and a sense of responsibility before God and man. Thus, it is of the utmost importance that the one who leads others is himself not led by anyone. Those who have responsibility in the church are led directly by Christ Himself. To be led by Christ, we must stay outside the camp, where we can hear the voice of the Spirit. Although it looks like the work that is going on outside the camp is insignificant, what is done there will accomplish more than preaching to thousands inside the camp. Consider Jesus, what a great work He did among what would seem to be so few!

“We have an altar from which those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat.” Hebrews 13:10. The body of Christ is on this altar — His flesh and His blood. It is our spirit, not our natural man, that is nourished at this altar. Our natural man is included in Christ’s body of death on the altar, for our meat is to do God’s will, and God’s will is our sanctification. We are both destroyed and made alive together with Him. This altar is within us. We have a right to eat from it. The more we eat, the more we are quickened in the spirit, and the more we are consumed and put to death according to the flesh. However, the one who is only cleansed outwardly from outward sins serves the tabernacle and has no altar within himself from which to eat. We must die with Him if we want to live with Him.

Stand firm in Christ! Do not fear, even if Satan rages! Bind the flock together in the sound faith and doctrine! Let no one despise you because of your youth! Watch over the flock, and God will give you more than enough wisdom.

Hearty greetings to you as well as to the brothers and sisters in the Lord. Sharing the same sufferings produces love for one another. Hallelujah!

Yours, battling in Christ,

Johan





Horten, April 30, 1907 — # 40


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your last letter. We are all doing well here, thanks be to God. We had meetings last Sunday and on Prayer Day*, and the hall was just packed. We took up a collection at the first meeting, and 13.60 kroner came in. Since this covered the rent for both days, we didn’t take up another collection. There are quite a few “Nicodemuses” here who agree with us, but secretly, for the sake of their good name and reputation. On Prayer Day a couple of people stood up and preached false liberty, but there were probably not many who understood what was going on. Because of the large number of people present, we let it pass without comment. On Sunday quite a few of them showed up, but God gave us the upper hand, and not one of them said anything — despite the fact that we spoke about false liberty and warned against it. We must be like the prophet who worked on the wall with one hand and swung the sword with the other. It’s a good thing that we have rented a hall for ourselves, because now no one can usurp the leadership. For that matter, we could have rented the largest meeting hall in town, because there is no lack of funds. On Sunday the hall was filled to overflowing.

Last winter brother X was in Sarpsborg. At a meeting where he had spoken in tongues, a woman from Lapland stood up and explained that he had said in her native tongue, “Get rid of every hindrance; Jesus is coming soon.” This woman traveled around giving lectures. It’s amazing how at times the atmosphere can be charged with the spirit of opposition and unbelief. It is virtually impossible to employ the gifts of the Spirit for edification until the spirit of unbelief has been rendered powerless. God has given me absolute authority over the spirit of unbelief and the spirit of opposition. These spirits are in subjection and powerless when commanded to be silent or to depart. At such times God’s Spirit has an even more powerful effect than usual, and my spirit rejoices boundlessly. Those who had previously been influenced by unbelief and mockery are stunned and incapacitated. They just stand there dumbfounded, and then they begin to listen and be interested. I rejoice, not that the spirits are in subjection, but in that power which puts all things under itself and can itself go under all things. This power is two-fold, having both a negative and a positive effect. On the one hand, it causes our flesh to be humiliated before the flesh of those who don’t have the Spirit. On the other hand, greater is the Spirit which is in us than the spirit which is at work in the children of unbelief.

There are three who bear witness on earth: the Spirit, the water, and the blood, and these three agree in one. He who believes has the witness in himself. The water is for outward cleansing, whereas the blood cleanses us within. The Spirit cannot be united with anything but water and blood, and there are no exceptions! This totally eliminates false liberty — the liberty to sin, that is.

What are “the deeds of the body”? These are deeds that I hate and judge. Is doing deeds of the body the same thing as committing sin, the same thing as transgressing the law? No! The law can only be transgressed willfully, and then only after I’ve been tempted, whereas the deeds of the body are never a fruit of temptation. That which is born of the flesh is flesh and cannot obey the law of God; that which is born of the Spirit is spirit. We are buried with Him by baptism into death, and in this baptism all the deeds of the body are condemned to death once for all. We are crucified with Christ, and cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree. In other words, we are cursed with Him. But that which is crucified and accursed must die; so we are to die with Him. And if we are dead with Him, we believe we shall also live with Him.

I will probably be sailing on the Sleipner as ship’s purser on May 21.

Greet everyone at home, as well as all the brothers and sisters. Most sincere greetings to you personally from your brother in that which is perishing, but far more in that which shall abide,

Johan


* A former Norwegian religious holiday following All Saints Day





Horten, May 11, 1907 — # 41


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your very good letter. Your reports from Kristiansand are always like a breath of fresh air. It is a joy for me and for us all that everything is going so well there and that you have had a “full house” at the Workingmen’s Club. Hallelujah, the Lord honors the work of His servants! Here in Horten we live in quietness and solitude. A number of people who had been living as unenlightened Christians are now coming to life and beginning to rejoice.

How good God is! He reconciled us to Himself by the death of His beloved Son when He raised Him from the dead for our justification. Being justified by faith, we have peace with God. Justification is something we feel and perceive before we actually begin to live a righteous life. But once we begin to live righteously, this becomes our fruit unto sanctification. The Spirit convicts the world of sin, righteousness, and judgment. Nevertheless, Christ has become for us God’s wisdom and righteousness and sanctification. Sanctification takes place by walking in the Spirit. Without holiness, no one will see God. There are many who experience the righteousness of Christ yet never become sanctified. First the Spirit convicts of sin, because one does not believe in Him (in other words, one is an unbeliever). Then the Spirit convicts of righteousness (because now we believe and are resurrected with Him), for He goes to His Father. After this, the Spirit convicts us of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged (sanctification). Conviction of sin is what condemns the ungodly. Conviction of righteousness is what causes the believer to rejoice. Conviction of judgment brings the soul who is being sanctified into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings. If anyone wants to be Jesus’ disciple, he must deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow Him. A person can be justified without being His disciple, but no one can be sanctified without being His disciple. Justification is exclusively a work of Christ in us

— and that “not of ourselves.” Sanctification is a work in which the person himself — through the Spirit — lays down his life. Everything is the work of Christ, but we belong to Christ; so we can distinguish when we are actively involved and when we are not.

It gives me great joy to write to you about the mysteries of Christ, because I know you understand what I write. It thrills my heart to be at God’s disposal, learning of Him in His holy counsels.

Blessed is each and every one who is taught by Him. He will make us pillars in the temple of His God. That temple is made up of living stones. Christ is the chief cornerstone, and the apostles are the foundation. When each living stone (person) grows, the whole temple grows. We are built up together with the others as a habitation of God in the Spirit. Hallelujah!

The tract you sent me was excellent. It is rare to see such truths in print outside the Bible. However he seems to have excluded the personal aspect of salvation quite a bit. “But if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.” This personal aspect must be taken into account. “If any man will be My disciple, let him take up his cross,” etc. What is salvation if we disregard the personal aspect? We know that God is in no need of salvation, nor is Christ, nor is the Spirit. But we are to be saved; I am to be saved. When a person is afraid of the personal pronoun “I,” it is because the “I” of the flesh has caused so much trouble. But now, it is not this “I” that lives; nevertheless, “I” live. It is this latter “I” that we mustn’t put to death; otherwise, we do away with ourselves altogether, and nothing will be left. Our joy is based on the very fact that we have a justified (righteous) “I,” an “I” which shall not die. Those who lose their life (their “I”) will find their life (their “I”). All this is so very clear.

Greet everyone at home. Greet Ludwig; I saw him so clearly in the spirit one evening while I was praying for him. And convey my greetings in Christ to all the brothers and sisters.

An official communiqué has arrived from the Commanding Admiral saying that the Sleipner will not be sailing until the middle of July.

Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 17, 1907 — # 42


My dear Family,

Thank you for your letter, which arrived today. I’m not writing this to refute you, Father, but rather to look at the matter from another point of view. You wrote, “It’s all well and good to admonish one another, but we must be careful lest we too be tempted and become entangled in a net so subtle that we don’t even notice we’re caught.”

A lot could be said about this, and it is always good to talk about things that can teach us something. Personally, I have no faith in Satan’s net, be it subtle or crude. Confidence and faith in God make us strong and give us victory in abundance, so for us Satan’s net is more like a spider’s web — powerless. We can’t just say “Hallelujah” to all that is said at the meetings, either. It wouldn’t be long, I’m afraid, before everything was choked by weeds. Weeding is necessary. When the world mocks us, it should be on account of our spirituality, because then we are the victors. But if, like Samson, we are mocked because we do so many foolish things that we are captured and bound, this does not glorify God; it dishonors Him. You said yourself that it is a strange sight to see a whole lot of people straining to work themselves up into a spiritual state. You have a point there, and when I encounter this sort of thing I speak out, so that the people concerned can be made aware of what they are doing and change course. There are always things that need correcting.

I am convinced that there is a need for pruning — at the right time — lest everything grow wild. Here in Horten things are developing in a healthy way. Satan does not get much opportunity to attack, because a sober spirit prevails for the most part and the situation is under control. We don’t chastise like the ten thousand taskmasters who want to slay. No, God has given us another mind. When correction is given, it is done for the good of the person concerned. Our fathers chastened us for our profit, but the ten thousand taskmasters chasten out of hate, to kill. Obviously it would be best if everything went without a hitch and no correction were necessary, but it has never been that way, and never will be.

“The one who assumes too much authority is despised,” goes the saying. But when a person assumes no more authority than God has given him, everything goes smoothly and as it should. A person who buries his talent in the ground instead of using it is foolish. If God has given a person the gift of leadership but he does not take the lead, someone else will come along and lead the others onto the broad way before anyone realizes what has happened. That’s why it is so important for us to use our talent. If I have been too weak in the past, my weakness has been that I have been too lenient. You can be sure of this: Satan’s servants are anything but lenient once they get their claws into someone. But by then it is a little late.

I know you mean well; so do I. It is written, “Preach the word! Be ready in season and out of season. Convince, rebuke, exhort with all longsuffering and teaching.” 2 Timothy 4:2. If someone has this ministry and carries it out with all longsuffering, he is not overextending himself but working within his own boundaries. He is not interfering in the affairs of others. If someone tells us about his occupation, we don’t reply, “You had better watch out, you might start bragging and fall into Satan’s subtle net.” The same thing applies in spiritual matters. We are within the bounds of our ministry as long as we do not exceed our measure of faith. If someone lies within the scope of our ministry and the sphere of his life and light is encompassed by our own, are we overstepping ourselves by ministering to him?

A mother can love her children in such a way that she overlooks all their faults, but in so doing she is nursing serpents at her own bosom.

It was obviously a common misconception among the Corinthians that Christ did not dwell in them unless they were inadequate (2 Corinthians 13:5). The same holds true today. It is as though we are obliged to be so friendly and nice that we let people walk all over us and allow all sorts of foolishness to flourish; otherwise we are not considered to be loving and godly. This is what people think it means to have Christ dwelling in us. They say that when we are inadequate, then Christ is in us. No wonder they sought proof that Christ was speaking through Paul when he reproved them for their folly!

Paul was only too happy to appear inadequate, if only they could be adequate, because he could do nothing against the truth. On the other hand, he says: “But I trust that you will know that we are not disqualified.” 2 Corinthians 13:6.

It’s 3:30 in the afternoon now, and I think I’ll take a walk, perhaps over to brother Ellefsen’s or to brother Berg’s.

Heartiest greetings from your son and brother,

Johan





Horten, May 27, 1907 — # 43


Dear Brother Aksel,

Many thanks for your good letter, which shows that everything is going well for you. Thanks be to God, who always gives us victory by our Lord Jesus Christ — a light sent to the world. “This is the judgment, that light has come to the world.” [Norw.] In other words, to go from light to light is to go from judgment to judgment. And since judgment is the death of Christ, the result is that the life of Christ is revealed in our mortal flesh. We could also put it this way: the second Adam has been made a life-giving spirit. God’s will is our sanctification. We must wholly submit ourselves to His will — hour by hour, day by day. To my astonishment I have met quite a few Christians who just shake their heads when the subject comes up of doing God’s will in their lives, doing His will in spirit and in truth. It is only when we begin to do God’s will that we come to know the doctrine which is of God. There are many winds of doctrine these days, but there is only one doctrine that leads to godliness. This doctrine cannot be separated from life. No wonder most people know nothing of God, for nobody can come to the Father except through the Son. But to come to the Father (perfection) through the Son (the way — our Mediator) is to go the way of obedience without compromising or sparing ourselves. There is freedom for each and every one to go forward on this way. But the farther we go, the more we partake of the fellowship of His sufferings. The greater the judgment, the more meekness it brings, because we are walking before the Lord — and that makes a person meek. There was not a single man in all of Israel who was as meek as Moses, but neither was there anyone who walked and talked face to face with God as Moses did.

God has displayed the whole of His wisdom in the work He accomplished in Christ. This is why Christ is called “the wisdom of God.” This wisdom dwells bodily in Christ, because the complete work took place in His body. In this way God’s wisdom has been conveyed to us human beings through the body of Christ, and we partake of His wisdom through Christ’s work in us. Wisdom is the end product of judgment and suffering; as such it contains every virtue, such as patience, forbearance, longsuffering, meekness, etc.

— a life which, as far as the world and Satan are concerned, is irreproachable. Wisdom is my greatest delight. It is more precious to me than choice gold, because it makes me unassailable. It enables me to resolve difficulties. It gives me courage and conviction, victory, and all that is praiseworthy. The fear of God is to cleave to the Lord; it is the greatest of all things here on earth. Wisdom is all that one has learned through one’s communion with the Lord. The fruit of godly fear is wisdom. In spite of his wisdom Solomon fell, but had he been godfearing, that would not have happened. This is why we can say that there is nothing greater than the fear of God, for there is a preserving power in it that never fails. But since godly fear begets wisdom, we must say that wisdom is the product of the fear of God; so it is difficult to separate these two things. Therefore, it is best to be godfearing and let wisdom and godly fear develop hand in hand, the one giving rise to the other, so that everything can be in harmony.

A woman who had been taken captive by a spirit of vanity, and had thus fallen away from God, came forward at a recent meeting and asked us to pray with her so that she could renew her relationship with God. She said she felt God was so far away, and asked what the reason might be. So I explained to her that little by little she had given in to her worldly tendencies and that, as a result, another spirit had gradually found its way into her heart and caused God to be far away from her. She acknowledged that this was the case.

It’s really getting quite late now. Greet everyone at home. Greet the brothers and sisters, and the very best to you personally.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, June 6, 1907 — # 44


Dear Brother Aksel,

We are doing well; I hope you are, too. We are still having good meetings where the power of God is mightily present. On Sunday the little flock of us that usually meets together is going to take a trip out into the country.

We have been offered the temporary use of two large rooms in the middle of town for meetings, free of charge. We don’t have benches, so we will have to get some long planks and lay them across some chairs.

I have read through the little book. The author writes that love is the greatest gift of the Spirit. Almost everyone is mistaken about this. 1 Corinthians 12:31 shows us the most excellent way to the gifts — the way being love. The gifts will cease, but love will never cease. Think if one were to receive the gift of tongues and another “the gift of love.” The tongues would cease, and love would remain. The one who had received the gift of tongues would be in a bad way, wouldn’t he?

Here are some proverbs for you:

Be silent toward the one who contends with you until you have overcome yourself. Your silence will amaze him, and afterwards your words will destroy what remains of his lofty designs.

Be silent in an assembly, and pay close attention to the Spirit. When it leads you, then speak, for your vision only extends to the present moment, whereas the Lord sees the meeting from beginning to end and will prompt you to contribute at the right time.

Be silent when you are not sure about a matter. This will hide your ignorance and cause others to nourish the hope that your silence belies a reserve of knowledge.

Think better of a person than he deserves; it is better that he senses your confidence than your distrust. You can’t expect to be right on target, anyway.

Don’t be quick to chasten your brother. But if you do chasten him, examine yourself and always be sure that your chastisement contains hope and a way of escape, so that afterwards he can be reunited with you; for chastening leads to life, but he who kills is a murderer.

If you are righteous, keep it between you and God, for no one but God can reward you, anyway.

The fear of God is an abomination to the ungodly, but wisdom will destroy him.

That’s enough proverbs for the present; on to knowledge and insight through the Holy Spirit in Christ Jesus our Lord, the Lord and Master of insight, who for the glory that was set before Him, patiently endured. Tribulations are pressure exerted on the body of sin, and patience is the firstfruits of the Spirit in the sufferings. This in turn produces character, the glorious result of which is hope.

Christ is the way on which the body of sin is destroyed. He consecrated a new and living way for us through the veil — that is, His flesh. In the old covenant they were able to observe this flesh through the Spirit of Christ that was in them. They could also behold the suffering and death of this flesh and the subsequent glory. They were able to do this by faith, in hope against hope, because the Spirit of Christ testified beforehand. When Christ was on earth, the kingdom of heaven was within Him to the extent that He had suffered death according to the flesh. Christ was crucified to the flesh throughout His life, and He conquered it through God’s Spirit; therefore, God is Christ’s head. And now we conquer the flesh by that Spirit which Christ made His own; therefore, Christ is our head. We, too, are made alive in the spirit, little by little, as we suffer death in the flesh. This is the fellowship of His sufferings and the fellowship of His glory.

Well, it’s getting late, so I’ll close for now with loving greetings to you and everyone there at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, June 25, 1907 — # 45


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter; thank you so much. It was an unusual letter, and it tells me that you have entered into the fellowship of His sufferings. Philippians 3. You say you have never seen your root (the root of sin) so black, and that it is your awareness of how abominable this root of sin is which enables you to love others more than yourself. Yes, that is the deepest understanding of the Christian life, and in it lies the conviction of judgment. Judgment has come into the world, and the prince of this world shall be cast out. The Spirit convicts us of judgment, because the prince of this world is judged. Judgment rests over the body of sin, which is to be destroyed. This is a matter of the heart and not the head, and it will always be so.

It was a pleasure to read your last letter, because I know that through this blessing or revelation God will give you understanding of the mysteries of Christ in a far deeper sense than you have had up to now. Because the Spirit within you has begun to consume the root of sin (the body of sin), you will be made capable of greater patience and greater insight, and will be better able to lead and guide, so that you can be a pillar in the temple of God.

Some time after I received the Spirit of God, I was led into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings, and ever since then I have been misunderstood continually. Nevertheless, praised be God, His Son has gone the same way, and He understands us. There is suffering in not being understood. The children don’t understand the fathers. The Spirit of the Lord makes us wise; we don’t become wise just because many years have gone by. But in the course of many years, the Spirit of the Lord can mold us.

As you can see from this letter, God has also given these truths and revelations to me. But from the moment Jesus set His face toward Jerusalem, everyone forsook Him. And so it is today. From the moment we set our faces toward Jerusalem (i.e., incline our hearts to suffer with Him), we will be alone. Hallelujah! Among those who have received the baptism of the Spirit, men are needed who have set their faces toward Jerusalem; for such men know the course and know the way — the way through the veil, which is His flesh. I never tire of speaking about these glorious truths. If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him.

We will not be so quick to condemn others when, in the light of the Spirit, we see ourselves as the wretched creatures that we really are. In this lies our weakness and our strength. Yes, it is praiseworthy, dear brother, that you have taken the kingdom of heaven by force — to the point of suffering with Him. In this we shall have a fellowship in the Spirit of a far deeper kind than we have ever had before. The first earth was destroyed by water. The earth that now exists has been reserved for fire. From this we can conclude that we have buried the body of the flesh (the leading of the flesh) through baptism, yet without being cleansed from the impurity of the flesh. The present earth — the impurity of the flesh (the body of sin, our self-will) — is going to perish by fire. We are baptized with the Holy Spirit and fire. When the fire consumes the body of sin, suffering comes — the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings.

Selma related how you and Helga have become so reflective of late, how you now always have something to think and talk about. So this was truly a joy for me to hear.

Greet everyone at home, and heartfelt greetings to you from your brother in the Lord,

Johan





Horten, July 9, 1907 — # 46


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you so much for your two postcards. Father wrote in his letter that you often visit a Bible school.

It is vital that we remain in that liberty by which the Lord has made us free. “You were bought at a price; do not become slaves of men.” It is quite obvious that as a student one has to listen; but if the teacher is not a teacher of God, then the doctrine is not for the spirit but for the flesh. There is only one way to possess the knowledge of God — namely, to receive it by and through the spirit of revelation. Ephesians 1:17. God is spirit, and His knowledge is imparted in the Spirit, as well as His love and all the other divine attributes. We have received the Teacher of righteousness, the Spirit who will teach us all things and bring to our remembrance everything Jesus said. It is a matter of staying on the offensive in the battles of life.

I see that you are zealous in the Lord’s service. Let this zeal continue until the end, for zeal makes us fully established in hope. Let no one overpower you, and don’t let Delilah cut your hair and cause you to lose your strength. Let your hair grow freely, let it grow long, and never reveal the source of your strength. Let them return to you, but you must not return to them. Some of Israel’s enemies went out to meet Joshua and pretended to be wayfarers traveling from afar. Joshua let them live, but God was displeased, for He had said: “But if you do not drive out the inhabitants of the land from before you, then it shall be that those whom you let remain shall be irritants in your eyes and thorns in your sides, and they shall harass you in the land where you dwell.” Numbers 33:55. Joshua had sworn that they would be allowed to live, so he had to make them slaves — water carriers.

The same goes for us. We have no right to accept just anything, but we do have the right to keep what we have in purity and to rid ourselves entirely of everything impure, whatever the source.

We are ministers of the new covenant, which is no less exacting than the old covenant. The body of sin is to be destroyed, not spared, whether it be mine or theirs, for Christ is not the minister of sin, but the destroyer of both its root and its fruit.

Now we have two large rooms for meetings. We have been having some good meetings lately. We are expecting Father on the 11th and 12th of this month. That should be interesting.

I was happy to read that you have been using the gifts of the Spirit in your meetings. Be strong and of good courage, and no one will be able to cast a shadow on your liberty. I am praying that you may stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made you free, for I know from experience that it is easy to become bound.

Praise God for all things in Christ Jesus, to whom be the power and the glory for all eternity! He is faithful who called us with an eternal calling. We are simply unable to express His praise. Though we pray for wisdom and insight, He can only be praised in the measure that we understand something of His work and His wondrous deeds. Thus, no human being can praise Him perfectly, for glory and praise without understanding is nothing at all. So, if we pray for more wisdom and more understanding, it is in order that we might discover more of His work and thereby His praise and glory become that much greater. The manifold wisdom of God is made known by the church to the principalities and powers in the heavenly places. We are His workmanship into which He has grafted the mysteries of His workings to the extent that we have been formed in the hands of the Master.

Greet all the dear brothers and sisters, and heartiest greetings to you in Christ Jesus from your resting, strengthened, working, dying, and quickened brother in Him,

Johan





Moss, August 3, 1907 — # 47


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter, asking me to go to Copenhagen. Thank you, too, for the confidence that you have shown me, which was an encouragement in the spirit. However, I am not allowed to leave the country; I’m on restricted leave. One day each week I have to visit the ship and make a report. Besides, there are other, more important considerations.

There was talk of establishing a “prophet school” of the good old sort. It is extremely difficult to find suitable students for such a school. They have to be spiritual, for God is spirit, and the knowledge of God can only be received in the Spirit. Jesus said, “You did not choose me, but I chose you.” Students for such a school would have to be chosen by a very spiritual person. Moreover, the teachings of Christ are of such a nature that those who have the funds in hand might first need to be broken down.

It is possible to have a fervent zeal that is not of God, but merely for God. Peter struck off the servant’s ear, and the disciples asked if they should command fire to fall from heaven and consume those who did not receive Jesus. In the same way, in their initial enthusiasm, these brothers could establish a school. A school in the Spirit is an extremely difficult thing to start, because a breaking down process must take place before it is possible to start building. The brothers who had thought to do this mean well and are exceptionally zealous, no doubt, but theirs is clearly a zeal without discretion.

My heart’s desire is to work in Christ, but a firm foundation is essential. If I were to go to Denmark and notice a good deal of foolishness, and then let them know it, I wonder if they could bear it? My ministry in Christ is such that if I were to come, I’m afraid they might find me not as they wished. The most important thing is that the body of sin gets destroyed. But who would support such a ministry? At any rate, Paul had to work with his hands as well as preach the Word.

Suppose they stick to their decision to start a school. If God is the driving force behind it and wants me to go there, He will put it into their hearts to write to you and ask for my address, and then they will contact me. Or else one of them will come to visit me. Under no circumstances would I go there without first instructing them thoroughly in what it really means to start a spiritual school. Something that is begun, only to fall apart after a short time, is not founded on God’s wisdom, but perhaps in zeal for God — a zeal without discretion. God will not put His servants to shame, which is why He gives us enough sense to avoid what is doomed to failure.

You and Helga are most welcome; it will be interesting to talk together. Now I’m off to Fredrikstad for a few days.

Hearty greetings to you and Helga, from your devoted brother in the Spirit,

Johan





Horten, August 26, 1907 — # 48


Dear Aksel,

Last night we had a very good meeting; we didn’t leave the hall until 12:30 a.m. The meeting was full of praise to God, who had loosed bonds and chains. X prayed fervently that God might search his heart and set him free from everything. It was a blessed meeting, indeed! God gave me a word concerning the fine linen, which is the righteous acts of the saints. Revelation 19:7–8. God made this clear to me before the meeting. What, then, is this precious linen in which the bride is to be arrayed? The precious linen is her virtues. The one who is lost suffers the loss of his body. He takes his evil works (filthy clothes) with him, and he cannot receive nourishment for his body of sin (the rich man). By the same token, the one who is saved wins the salvation of his body. His good works are his “precious linen,” and he is satisfied when he beholds the face of Christ. Every form of life must have covering and nourishment for its body. We have spoken before about the fact that every sin that a person commits is outside the body, but it has been performed by the body. This sin forms a covering on the outside of the body, like a filthy garment. All the good that a person does is also outside the body, but it, too, has been performed by the body. These virtues of the saints are the fine linen, clean and bright. This ought to encourage us and spur us on to good works, so that we may be found clothed and not naked. We weave our clothing for eternity while we are here on earth. If we want to have beautiful garments, we now know how to weave them.

A brother said recently that a branch that grows on the north side of a tree bears less fruit than one facing south, and that the branch on the north side has no choice but to remain where it is; it is on the north side through no fault of its own. It wasn’t easy to comment on this, but I said to the brother that there was no “north side” in Christ, since He Himself was the light — the sun, in whom we must walk. Perhaps the parable about the talents would have been more appropriate here, for the one who had ten talents could earn another ten, whereas the one who had only one talent could earn only one more.

Then we spoke about Philippians 3, that we are to know Him, the power of His resurrection, and the fellowship of His sufferings, so that we could be conformed to His death. Read this in the German Bible.

Hearty greetings from all of us here.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, September 13, 1907 — # 49


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for the postcard and the picture I received today.

We must look straight ahead in order to plow properly. We must look straight ahead in order to walk properly on the narrow way. We must look straight ahead and through the flesh in order to go straight ahead in Christ. We must see right through destruction and a firmly decreed judgment. Isaiah 10:23. Since our anchor is cast within the veil (i.e., His flesh), we see the way clearly before us. We know the way. The Lord’s people are a fearless people; their strength is the strength of the Lord. They don’t get in one another’s way; they all move straight ahead, each on his own way.

They leap over walls and crush a troop. Everything is consumed before them, and in their wake is death and destruction.

We no longer know anyone according to the flesh. If someone comes to the meeting in fine apparel and with a ring on his finger, we don’t offer him a good seat ahead of the poor, for in Christ Jesus only a new creation is of any value. Every hill must be brought low and every valley exalted, for the way is clear and straight. “For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty in God for pulling down strongholds, casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.” 2 Corinthians 10:4–5. Even though we may be unskilled in speech, we are not unskilled in knowledge.

They who have the Spirit take up the battle in the Spirit by the Spirit. Honor wisdom, and wisdom will honor you. It will enable you to understand dark sayings and riddles. Wisdom contains the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, the Spirit of counsel and might, and the Spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. Isaiah 11:2. Christ is God’s wisdom. All these attributes of the Spirit must be seen in relation to us who are the object of God’s work in the Mediator.

I accompanied brother X to a meeting recently and spoke to him about what was wrong with going to meetings where there isn’t complete freedom. He, in turn, reproved me sharply for being too isolated and too particular. He went on ahead to the meeting, and I went home. There was a tremendous struggle at that meeting. I had known these opposers for a long time; they had never dared to stand up and wage an honest battle. But now that they had K. and E. alone, they really let them have it. Both K. and E. had felt for a long time that I was too harsh and radical, but when they had the enemy at their own throats, they began to understand something of the difficulties and the struggle I have had in keeping these people at bay without K. and E. even knowing that a struggle was going on. But since they didn’t understand this on their own, God permitted these spiritual forces to assault them. Now they are more appreciative of the ministry God has given me in Christ Jesus for their sakes. That same evening K. said: “Now I understand brother Smith better than before. He’s been harsh, but now I understand why.” God had shown me in the Spirit that I should stay away from that meeting. If it had progressed like a normal meeting, I would have been put to shame. But from that evening on, God exalted me in their eyes, because they fought almost beyond their ability — and still didn’t win the victory!

God’s ways are wondrous. At the last meeting I told the brothers and sisters that God had given me the spirit of revelation in the knowledge of Him right from the time I received the Spirit in 1900, and that I found it necessary to say this in order to strengthen their confidence. Paul says also: “For we do not preach ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord, and ourselves as your bondservants for Jesus’ sake.” In other words, he had to preach himself as a servant for their sakes. I also said that I was not saying this to praise myself, but that if anyone wanted to interpret it as praise, then I stood exposed before the eyes of God and man, and that they could take it just as they wished. If we endeavor to seek God’s honor in everything, God will bless our ministry so that it succeeds. I am happy beyond measure and strengthened in faith — praise and glory be to His name!

My wish for all of you is: John 17:17. My exhortation to those who are young in Christ: 1 Thessalonians 4:3–6. To those who have a lust to travel: 1 Thessalonians 4:11–12. To those with an unbridled tongue: Proverbs 17:27. To those who are rich in this world: Proverbs 18:11. And for you personally: Isaiah 26:10. Greet everyone at home and the brothers and sisters — if they can be reached, and as far as they can be reached in zeal for the truth during the destruction of the flesh and the quickening of the spirit in the same body — in the Mediator by the Spirit of Christ through the Father.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, October 15, 1907 — # 50


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter of the 11th. It is always a pleasure to hear from you. Thank you very much for the English New Testament; that was very thoughtful of you. The power of God has been mightily at work in our meetings lately.

When a local church is established, it is of utmost importance that some be appointed to shepherd the flock and that responsibility be given to those who are equal to the task and who live in the locality. Paul stayed a year or two in each place. During this time he would raise up a flock, where he would subsequently appoint elders, etc. — not ambitious tyrants who would rule over the flock, but brothers who could say at all times: “Follow me even as I follow Christ.” I want to draw your attention to the German translation of 2 Timothy 2:15.

How necessary it is that a servant of the Lord not take the edge off the Word. It must be used in all its sharpness. Just let it have its effect — whether unto death or unto life. Only the fear of man and cowardice can cause people to take the edge off the Word. And then they tell themselves and others that they are doing so only out of love. This is and always has been a lie. Who can be an aroma of death leading to death for those who are perishing, and an aroma of life leading to life for those who are being saved?

It is blessed to sow beside all waters, blessed to reap in the harvest of Christ, so we, as a speck in time, can finish our work before we pass on and can do no more.

When we plow deep, we encounter more resistance than when we plow shallow. The deeper we dig, the more resistance we encounter. We get off easily if we just pass over lightly. Superficiality abounds, but Christ dug deep. To dig deep in Christ means to dig deep in self-acknowledgment. All human beings have within themselves the prerequisites of life — if only they would deliver it all into the Master’s hand to be dealt with by Him.

Brother G. is a very dear brother. I just wish he were bolder, and that he wouldn’t cling so slavishly to the letter, but rather get hold of the spirit in the matter. A soldier has to be free and unencumbered. Brother G. is actually well suited to be a teacher in Christ Jesus, if only he could learn the art of being free and not so rigid. We got along well, and I asked him to look after those who were not established yet, to teach them thoroughly, and to chase away adversaries and enemies of all kinds, so that the lambs could find pasture in peace.

There is much to learn, dear brother, and when we no longer care about pleasing men, we will learn. The one who seeks God’s honor — and God’s honor alone — is true, and there is no guile in him.

Don’t be afraid of your opponents, but conquer them with wisdom from God. Let no one overpower you — except the truth itself. Don’t show partiality; then God’s power will be with you and increase, for God Himself is no respecter of persons.

May you make good progress, both personally and in your ministry. It would be nice to hear how it’s going. Hearty greetings with Acts 4:12. Greetings from everyone here. Please write back soon.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, October 24, 1907 — # 51


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your letter of the 18th. It was a real joy to see and experience how God has allowed you to behold these glorious truths we encounter as we go through the veil — that is, His flesh. This is precisely where all knowledge and all wisdom is buried. It is common to desire a wisdom that is up in the air, up in the clouds. But the fact is that all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, even the fullness of the Godhead, dwell bodily in Christ Jesus, and there we can dig for hidden treasures. We must eat His flesh and drink His blood, for this is food and drink indeed. Can we understand this with our heads — without an enlightened mind? No, we can no more grasp it with our heads than with our feet. God’s Spirit accompanies the knowledge of God. But just as Christ offered Himself through the eternal Spirit, we can offer ourselves through the Spirit of Christ. Christ as Mediator encompasses everyone who is in Him; therefore, the Mediator is not just for one. He is the way to the Father (perfection). On this way His flesh and blood were consumed through the eternal Spirit. Thus, God did what the law could not do. The devil can tempt us through flesh and blood. But when flesh and blood have been sacrificed, the devil no longer has anything on which he can exert his influence.

We read about those who “sleep in Christ.” From this we understand that the fruit of our life here on earth is only proportionate to what we have attained by being made alive by the second Adam. Our bodies “fall asleep” in Him. But since it is in Him that our bodies fall asleep, and His body has been raised up, then we, too, must necessarily be raised up in Him, for He is no longer in the grave. The aspect of time may be important for us, but not for God, who counts those things that are not as though they were. Where, then, is our horizon? It is within the body of Christ. Can we expand our horizon? Yes, within the body. Can we reach beyond the body? No, Christ offered Himself up completely, so there is no room for anything outside the body. Nor can we jump out of our own skin and say: “Here I am.” No, our entire “I” is in Christ — for to me, to live is Christ. But then, how can Jesus be high priest? By offering Himself to the uttermost; therefore He can come to the aid of those who are still offering themselves. But the One who offers Himself and those who are being offered are all of one. Therefore He is not ashamed to call them brethren.

We have no advantage over other people. The important thing for us is to remain before God in order to obtain knowledge and guidance. This is the ministry of a prophet, for a prophet stands between God and the people. God has prophets in His church in our day, too. Every prophet must act independently and receive his orders directly from God through the Spirit. It is not for a prophet to lose himself in the masses, but to live in intimate fellowship with the Lord, stand in His counsels, and inform the people about what God reveals. Read Exodus 18, from verse 13. There you see that Moses appointed leaders to judge the people. Only when there was a difficult dispute were they to bring it to Moses (verse 26).

It is the same way now. While we remain before God’s face, receiving what to say by a spirit of revelation, we must also endeavor to instruct the leaders. These leaders, in turn, must watch over the souls entrusted to them. We can intervene when there are signs of trouble and when difficulties arise. We can’t carry out this most important ministry if we are involved in everything. There are enough of those who are willing to run as messengers; the point is to give them a message to run with!

Our ministry in the Lord must be a conscious thing for us, so that we can make the most of each individual situation as we abide in the sufferings. Therefore, as I said last time, as far as I can remember, if you meet a spiritual brother whom you consider to be especially capable and faithful, make it clear to him at once that he must look after the flock where he is. Place responsibility on his shoulders, and really impress upon him what he has to do. There must be order. People can’t just roam around like a flock of sheep.

One must learn to obey before one can learn to give orders. If there are some in the flock who refuse to obey, they must be treated with caution so that they don’t draw others along with them.

Brother G. has written to me about the subject you also wrote about: the publication of a paper. He had in mind a 16-page publication. I wrote to him and suggested we start with a smaller one. At the same time I told him that if we do publish something, we must work for the furtherance of the truth and not for the furtherance of the publication; then God will take care of its progress. For the time being we can say much through a smaller paper. I am very interested in such a work, and I believe that God will use me to refute, convince, chasten, and exhort through such a publication. There are enough religious newsletters, so our paper would have to be sharp and focused.

Now it’s getting late. Regarding the opponents you wrote about, let me comfort you with Joshua 10:24–25.

It’s a joy to hear that it’s going well for you and that you are able to be of use.

Hearty greetings in Christ Jesus with Zechariah 11:4.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, November 2, 1907 — # 52


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your two postcards. The last one just arrived. I see that God is with you, blessing the work as He distributes the gifts of the Spirit. It is blessed to be along in the work of “undermining.” The most important thing is that some be given thorough instruction, because one person who is solid is worth more than 20 others who aren’t. Abraham received the blessing through just one — Isaac. It is extremely important to seek God for the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him. We ought to emphasize this strongly, so that others will want to be taught. Instruction is necessary, because most people know nothing about God. What we have freely received, we must freely give to others. Our last meeting was exceptionally good. We now have a room upstairs at the back of the house. And sometimes we meet in homes. The brothers and sisters are becoming more and more established. There were two women who tended to get carried away emotionally in the meetings. They were edifying themselves without regard for those around them. One day I had an urge to talk to them, so we took a walk and talked along the way. During our conversation both of them got light over the fact that we can’t just think about ourselves and our own personal edification at the meetings. Each one of us must do his best to edify the church and show consideration for the others in all that he does. These sisters put this into practice at the last meeting, and everything worked out very well indeed. I suspect there are many in various assemblies who are being disturbed by people who only think about their own edification to such an extent that it disrupts the meetings. Such people must be reprimanded. As a rule, they are usually acting in ignorance. Both these women were genuinely happy to get light about this. It had never occurred to them that they were to participate along with all the others. They had been singlemindedly occupied with battling through for themselves, which they felt was the most important thing.

Concerning the gift of prophecy, we are exhorted in Romans 12:6 to use it in proportion to our faith. A reminder to this effect is clearly called for, so that nobody runs wild or becomes spiritually intoxicated and comes up with things that don’t make any sense at all.

I’ve written to Misjonæren [a religious publication] on the subject of love. The article will probably be in next week’s issue. You see, a man wrote that there was no love in our day and age, that true love existed only in the days of the apostles. Actually, quite a few people think like that, so I felt it would be profitable to take a look at what love really is. I wrote, among other things, that no one was more useless than a person who sits on the sidelines and does nothing but cry out for others to show him love. It is as though the shoemaker is supposed to make his boots free of charge, the tailor is “duty bound” to make his clothes free of charge, etc. In brief, everyone is “obligated” to show him love, for he is “truly worthy.” I also wrote that true love never makes demands; it just gives without expecting a reward. Ever since I received God’s Spirit and His love, I have heard only about how unloving I am. Such people are always looking for someone who will love them (according to the flesh, of course). And when they don’t find anyone who will, they conclude that there simply is no love. The apostle says: He made known to me your love in the Spirit. Such parasites are fit for anything but the kingdom of God! We need men and women in our day who have a fountain of love in themselves to draw from, and for whom this fountain is sufficient, even if being ridiculed and spat upon should be their reward.

I received a letter from Father recently. He asked about you, and I explained to him the work God has now given you to do in Germany. I believe this will make him very happy. Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 14, 1907 — # 53


Dear Brother Aksel,

Your good letter, plus the books and magazines, have arrived. I’m amazed how scared D. has become. It seems S. has managed to knock him out with his arguments.

I wrote to K. that God has never been able to use people in His service who turn like a weather vane at the slightest puff of wind. In reply to what S. asserts about the laying on of hands — that “the Los Angeles Spirit” (as he so detestably calls it) was “transplanted” by the laying on of hands throughout America, Norway, and Germany — I said that I received the baptism of the Spirit in 1900, but received the gift of tongues, the gift of interpretation, and the gift of prophecy in 1907. I told him I have the same Spirit now, after receiving the gifts, as I had in 1900. I said that many people have received the Spirit and the gifts without the laying on of hands, that those who have received the Spirit live a godly life and detest sin in every shape and form, and that there is nothing dangerous about the Spirit that leads us to abstain from evil. Then I told him that according to S.’s and D.’s line of reasoning, the Spirit that was poured out in Jerusalem on the Day of Pentecost would have to be called the “Jerusalem Spirit,” and the Spirit that led Martin Luther would have to be called the “Wittenberg Spirit,” etc. As for 1 Corinthians 14:2, I said it is clear that he who speaks in tongues speaks to God, since nobody knows what all those strange words mean. When the interpretation comes, it comes for the purpose of edification, and thus for other people. This is where they felt I was completely wrong, to which I replied that we speak in the “Spirit of Christ,” and that Christ’s Spirit always thinks of the others — always has their best interests at heart.

Besides, all this philosophizing and all these “clever fables” that they are preoccupied with are carnal and soulish. I wrote to K. that only someone in gross darkness would dare to use the kind of expressions that D. has used. S. has probably forced D.’s back to the wall.

Regarding the matter of writing to the newspapers about the excesses that have occurred in different cities: I believe this would be counterproductive, since it would give our opponents an opening for attack, and then those who are weak might draw back.

God does not enjoin everyone to take up this battle; it is the shepherds who are to keep the enemy at bay. The sheep should be left to graze in peace, unaware of these battles. We must not let the wolf into the sheepfold and then take up the battle with him, or the sheep will be scattered. We must battle through in quietness, alone. When the enemy — the wolf — has been slain, then we can carry his carcass into the fold and show it to the sheep. Their confidence in the shepherd will be strengthened by this. It is God who has appointed “shepherds,” etc. in the church. We should always show our strongest side to the enemy, for then he will fear us, and our strongest side to those we are watching over, for this will strengthen them. We should show our weak side to God, who cares for us all. I have longed to write this letter to you.

We wage war in the spirit world. But once we have overcome in the Spirit, it only takes a few strokes of the pen to put a whole army of enemies to flight. He gives us power to tread on scorpions and serpents and to prevail against the hosts of hell. We must clearly separate the “doctrines of man” from the knowledge of God. That was quite a “scorpion” those Germans dispatched to the front lines! D. had even sought counsel from several “elder” brothers, and he had plans to seek even more advice from some “fathers in Christ.” I just hope he doesn’t meet the kind of “fathers” who were seated neatly in rows at the National Theater in Oslo during the pastors’ convention! I suspect that fathers of this kind would have fitted in perfectly as spectators at the Roman Colosseum, where Christians were tortured to death. It is a terrible thing when Samson loses his hair, because then they can gouge out his eyes so he is totally blind. God gives them over to a reprobate mind.

Those who are appointed to watch over God’s flock must be people who aren’t thrown off balance at the first onslaught of the devil. Concerning those things that have taken place in the church, much can be credited to these accounts: “So then, with the mind I myself serve the law of God, but with the flesh the law of sin.” “Blessed is the man to whom the Lord does not impute iniquity, and in whose spirit there is no deceit.” Sin was no doubt present, but the Lord will not reckon it as sin, since there was no deceit in your spirit. We, too, must bear this in mind. Concerning the brother you wrote about: there is no cause for alarm, as long as he intends to abstain from all that foolishness.

It is through battle that we get to know one another. Doing battle is actually fun, because it always ends in victory. “Now thanks be to God who always leads us in triumph in Christ.” So whether they “go over us with a fine tooth comb” (F. S. in Misjonæren), or they try to “sweep us under the rug” (D.), we will stand as firm as ever in the power of God.

Greetings to everyone at home. Greet the brothers and sisters, and sincere greetings to you from your brother who is always taking part in the battle and the victory in Christ Jesus,

Johan





Horten, December 19, 1907 — # 54


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your good letter of the 17th today — eight closely written pages generously sprinkled with questions. I rejoice to see that the battle has abated and that victory has been won thus far, and just as God has given us victory until today, we shall always overcome in Christ Jesus. I felt no small conflict within me as I read the information you gave me, but praise God, He gave victory. However, victory does not consist of refuting all our opponents’ words, but their power. The foundation upon which both S. and R. build their thoughts is full of worms. They drag others down to their own level and strongly warn against what is spiritual. When one reads a book like this, one can easily tell if the author is gathering to Christ or if he is scattering.

On the subject of prophets: a person is not a prophet just because he has the gift of uttering prophetic words. If that were the case, the twelve in Acts 19:6–7 would have been prophets. In Acts 13:1 we read about some prophets and teachers, among whom were Saul and Barnabas. These were real prophets. A prophet is a man who stands in the secret counsels of God. He is one who stands on his own two feet. Jesus is his shepherd, and he is a shepherd himself. A prophet is a mediator between God and the people; he is the mouthpiece of God. Abraham was a prophet for Lot. A prophet must always have someone to be a prophet for. Paul was a prophet and an apostle. “If I am not an apostle to others, yet doubtless I am to you,” he wrote to the Corinthians. He was conscious of his standing, and we — as many as have any standing in the Spirit — need to be conscious of ours, too. You could easily have remained a dental student all your life without ever becoming independent and conscious of your vocation, if at some point you had not terminated your studies and started your own practice. But as soon as you began on your own, you felt a personal responsibility, and this responsibility made you more competent than when you were a student. Likewise, in Christ we need to be conscious of our ministry. We should think of ourselves as we ought to think — not too highly, because that puffs us up; but not too lowly, either, because then we’ll get discouraged and someone else, who is less capable, will soon take the helm — to the detriment of God’s kingdom. A man should not hide his wisdom to the point of being overly modest, nor should he make himself out to be too wise, or he will do himself irreparable harm.

Moses and John the Baptist were prophets. They were pillars on whom the people could depend. But people can hardly depend on those who have just begun, like the twelve. Nevertheless, I believe a man is a prophet from his mother’s womb, as Samuel and Saul of Tarsus were, even if a period of time elapses before he gets converted. A prophet can draw conclusions and foretell in the Spirit how things will go if people act in this way or that. He stands in the secret counsels of God and knows God’s zeal and God’s way of leading things, just as ministers of state come to know their king. They know exactly what pleases or displeases him. John the Baptist could say, “Behold! The Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world!” He was able to say this in the knowledge of God, because all things and all spiritual signs pointed to the person of Christ. “He who sent me to baptize with water said to me…,” etc. This tells us that John sat in the counsels of God, because he was an emissary of God, sent directly from Him. God spoke to him directly, just as He did to Samuel. Eli was also a prophet, and should have been Samuel’s teacher, but he had grown so dull that God had to use Samuel to speak to him. We see that young Samuel became a prophet for old Eli, who was a prophet himself, but not one who lived up to his calling. There are degrees of greatness among the prophets. No man born of a woman was a greater prophet than John the Baptist.

As we have already seen, there are prophets in the new covenant. If a prophet does something wrong, God immediately appoints another prophet over him (David and Nathan, Samuel and Eli, etc.). A prophet is an authority as long as he is true to his calling. Christ was a prophet. A prophet should only be instructed by another prophet (Jesus and His disciples, Elijah and Elisha, etc.). A prophet must be faithful in all the counsels of God. God has appointed in the church: apostles, prophets, evangelists, shepherds, and teachers. A prophet can be a shepherd, teacher, and evangelist. In fact, being a prophet is the very thing that qualifies him for these ministries. If God has given us souls to safeguard in His church, we should do this with care. A similar principle applies here as in whaling: sometimes it is necessary to cast out a 200-300 fathom line when the whale suddenly takes off; but if the harpoon is well set, they can just wait till the whale tires and then begin to haul in the slack. The main thing is not to lose one’s grip on the whale. This is a great work of patience, but a very blessed work, nonetheless.

Things are going very well here now. There is unity and order as never before. There is a fear of gossiping, and it is a real pleasure to see how happy everyone is. Only with sword in hand and all guns at the ready can it go like this. They are lying in wait for us from all sides, but God has given us power.

If those who are spiritual will not lead, those who are carnal will come along and immediately take over the leadership — and they don’t spare the flock; I’ve seen an example of this. They don’t stop until they’ve destroyed all life. Of what was once a wonderful flock, not even two remain united. We would do well to take note of this. Their leader sanctioned all sorts of error and just laughed it all off; now we see the results.

The most difficult thing is to keep things pure within the flock. We can’t just lash out at everything that is wrong, because if we did, we would not be victorious. We must “play out the line” a few hundred fathoms, so that we don’t lose them. To be a minister of the Spirit, we must be able to maneuver with enormous patience and fearless intervention when necessary.

“The sting of death is sin.” 1 Corinthians 15:56. It is obvious that the sting of death has been taken away from us, because we are saved from sin, which is the sting. The sting (sin) is gone. That’s why it is written: “Those who have fallen asleep in Christ.” Christ experienced the sting of death when He was made to be sin for us. He was numbered with the transgressors.

To speak prophetically is to speak for the edification of the church (1 Corinthians 14:4). The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. What does this mean? Just this: Jesus testifies about the destruction of the body of sin, and He testifies about the building up of His own body, because He abolished sin by the one sacrifice. All prophetic words or messages must be along these lines, because in this Spirit we are to prophesy for the edification of the church (that is, His body). If the prophetic word doesn’t point to the destruction of the body of sin and the building up of our spiritual life, then in good conscience we can stop the mouth of the one prophesying, because the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy. In this Spirit we can’t seek our own or prophesy the vision of our own heart, but only serve the others, because this is the Spirit of Jesus.

As for the question about 1 Corinthians 14, from verse 7: Paul says this to make it clear to them how wrong it is to come together and speak in tongues when no one interprets. That would be like a foreigner coming into our meeting and beginning to preach in his own language. He would be speaking into thin air, because no one would understand him.

Paul said he spoke in tongues more than anyone. He didn’t mean that he continually went around speaking in tongues. He knew how to use the gift of tongues to good effect. One can speak in tongues in season and out of season, but only where the use of it accomplishes its mission does the gift fulfill the purpose for which it was given (namely, as a sign to unbelievers). Paul had better things to do than sit around all day long speaking in tongues. But he actually accomplished far more by what he spoke in tongues than all the others.

We must seek to develop the gifts of the Spirit and esteem them highly, instead of rejecting these wonderful things God has given us.

What we need first and foremost is rest, so that we can devote our hearts to understanding what God wants to reveal to us. We need to be more contemplative, because if our attention is always directed toward outward things, we will become worldly, but if we turn inward, we will become spiritual.

How do we understand verse 15: “I will pray with the spirit, and I will also pray with the understanding”? This is the opposite of verse 14, where we read, “For if I pray in a tongue, my spirit prays, but my understanding is unfruitful.” When Paul says he prays with his spirit and with his understanding, he is contrasting prayer in the usual sense with praying in tongues.

“Have you ever seen tangible evidence of verse 25?” you ask. Yes, this was the very thing that R. was so against. Even if one doesn’t always actually fall on one’s face literally, one does “fall on one’s face” in acknowledgment. I have seen this many times, and I have heard them preach it themselves.

Verse 19: Here Paul means just what he says. He would rather speak five words and be understood than ten thousand words in a tongue. Paul never thought in terms of his own edification, only that of the others. He was one of the fathers. The fathers’ only joy is that it goes well for the children, even if this means that the fathers have to suffer in the process. Christ did not serve Himself, but others. What is edifying to the fathers is to see the children being built up. Ten thousand words might very well have edified Paul greatly, because he who speaks in tongues edifies himself. But he was willing to forego that edification if, by using just five words with his understanding, he could edify the church. Let us have the same attitude of mind.

I agree with you that it is carnality, more than anything else, that tends to predominate among believers. “If you receive another spirit…” we read. Receiving this spirit has to be a conscious act on our part; it cannot come in without our knowledge. To receive “another spirit” we would have to deny the Spirit we already have. This is what it means to be “pulled up by the roots” and “twice dead.” However, this is not what usually happens. It is quite possible to be strongly influenced by “another spirit” without knowing it, even when our heart is right before God. I have seen this happen. But God sees our hearts and knows how to deliver us so that we don’t get pulled up by the roots. What people want most of all is to avoid suffering and obedience. This is carnality; it can bring unrest and greatly hinder spiritual growth.

Now I have poured out what was on my heart for the present. I may not have answered all your questions, but I think I have left you with enough to chew on.

I think it would be good if we could publish a little paper in our spare time. We could refute religious folly and spiritually unwholesome tendencies. Such a paper should be like a shepherd’s staff. We would have to use what God gives us, and not just clip out articles from other papers.

Greetings to those who are at home, and hearty greetings to you with Titus 2:1.

Your brother in Christ,

Johan





Horten, December 28, 1907 — # 55


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your good letter of the 22nd, which I received on the 26th.

I want to write to you about matters of supreme importance, but they should only be shared with those who are spiritual, because we are obligated to exercise good stewardship of the manifold grace of God.

We need insight concerning the ministry in the church of God. Revelation 1, verses 16 and 20. Read from verse 12 to the end. The angel of the church is the person to whom God has given authority

in the church. He bears the entire responsibility, and with this responsibility goes authority. The angel of the church is the one who receives all the blame and all the praise. When there is something that needs to be straightened out or put right in the church, it must be done through the angel of the church. It’s no use talking to anyone else, because no one else has the authority to put anything right. From God’s point of view, he is called the “angel of the church”; but from the church’s point of view, he is called “the overseer.” See 1 Timothy 3. So, “overseer” and “angel of the church” are two expressions for the same thing. To be an overseer in the church, the following is required:

	Above reproach.

	The husband of one wife (lest he be influenced by women, to the detriment of the church).

	Temperate or sober; he should be vigilant on all fronts.

	Prudent.

	Respectable.

	Hospitable; his home should be a center.

	Apt to teach, etc.

	Not a new convert. He must have a good testimony with outsiders.



	 There can only be one overseer in a church, but several ministering brothers. There are also qualifications for these ministering brothers, which are very similar to those for the overseer. Apostles were those who traveled around and established churches and had the oversight of them. (Apostle means messenger.) The overseer is one who lives permanently in a place (Titus 1, from verse 5). Titus stayed behind in Crete to appoint overseers (elders) in every city.

One should not be blind to these things, and where a local church is raised up, these ministering brothers will arise quite naturally. If they could be ordained to these positions in the days of the apostles, then they can be today as well. God has given me the ministry of an overseer here in Horten, and He has put the reins in my hands. God has given me authority to settle all disputes and defend the rights of those who are in the right. He has also given me authority to resolve all difficulties. No man has ordained me to this position — God Himself did. Because I understand perfectly well that God has given you this same ministry in K., I urge and exhort you to attend to this difficult yet blessed task with all discernment. The star is in His right hand, and with it He rules. The overseer must examine all visiting brothers closely, for not all of them are apostles. In fact, I have yet to meet a true apostle, one who has been able to teach these things and meet all the needs of the flock. Those who have come to us have themselves needed instruction. Some of those who are traveling around are even false apostles and deceitful workers.

These teachings should only be shared with those who have need of them, so that they can have full assurance in their walk in all things. Those who are carnal will interpret these things as boasting, but those who are spiritual will understand.

In a local church where there is a good overseer, there is also good order. But if the overseer is halting, the whole situation will be tenuous.

The overseer should not be a new convert. This point will perhaps be one of the most difficult for you, even though you are not really such a new convert. But it is important enough that you need to exercise great vigilance with yourself. The ministry God has given you is an exalted one, laden with responsibility; so you should pray for humility — great humility and grace, so that you treat the older men as fathers and the older women as mothers. Your authority mustn’t drive them away. If this happens, the reins will slip out of your hands, and you won’t be a true overseer.

In May I will be leaving for duty on a warship. What is needed now in the local churches is overseers (elders) and other ministering brothers. Above all, we need apostles who can find and ordain the right men for these important tasks.

Well, now I have written to you about matters that probably have not been practiced much since the days of the apostles.

Write back as soon as you can, because I want to know how it is going for you in these matters.

Thank you very much for everything this past year, and all of us here wish you God’s peace and blessing in the year to come.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 10, 1908 — # 56


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you very much for your good letter. It was also a joy to see your article. It is always good to fight together for the truth. I had already mailed my last article when I read yours. When I wrote this last article, I had to restrain myself severely in order to give them a courteous reply. I was afraid it wouldn’t get published if I poured out my heart about all the “humbug.” When you see clearly, you can speak clearly. When you look into a fog, your speech becomes foggy. The one whose vision is faulty also wavers in his judgment. But clear vision makes for clear judgment. It takes something to meet the test when the light is shining clearly. Concerning your letter, I must say that you replied very wisely and with modesty to what I wrote to you about. But even though you are conscious of nothing about yourself, as you put it, Paul was not conscious of anything against himself, either. However, he was not thereby justified. Nor was he sufficient of himself to think of anything as being from himself, but his sufficiency was of God (2 Corinthians 3:5). It is this sufficiency — the sufficiency of God — that we will be speaking about from now on. Paul called himself an apostle of the Lord, because that was the truth. It is vital that we attend to the work God has given us to attend to, because nobody else will be able to. I didn’t write what I wrote haphazardly, but in Spirit and truth. And no one can negate this truth. Therefore, you would do well to attend to the work to which God has appointed you, which I am convinced you have done up till now with zeal and with great joy. At times I have thought about handing over the task that God has given me to someone else. I would gladly sit on the sidelines watching it all and be thought of as incompetent — provided the others could lead things competently and prove to be competent themselves — but it wouldn’t last long.

“And you have not kept charge of My holy things, but you have set others to keep charge of My sanctuary for you.” So we can’t be relieved of our duty. Neither can we expect any recognition for our ministry in Christ, for the Corinthians demanded proof that Christ was speaking in Paul. The prophets of old were considered to be false, and the false prophets were thought to be genuine. To minister in the Spirit in such a way that we promote the obedience of faith (Romans 1:5) won’t win us any compliments. Nevertheless, each one who has received a ministry in Christ must be conscious of his ministry and behave as circumspectly as possible. There are many difficulties in a local church, and it takes strong shoulders to bear them.

Here in Horten there is a brother who has been undergoing a crushing work by the Spirit for some time now, and he was determined to have others with him in the same boat. When nobody would listen to him, he became adamant and tried to force the issue, because he felt we were being obstinate. It got so bad that several became upset. Today I fought it out with him for two hours. After that, he acknowledged his errors in the light of these verses:

“For everyone will be seasoned with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt. Salt is good, but if the salt loses its flavor, how will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace with one another.” Mark 9:49–50.

He prayed that he might become a whole sacrifice. It is written that the sacrifice must be seasoned with salt. But we must have this salt in ourselves, and keep peace with one another. He hadn’t done this; he hadn’t kept the salt in himself; the result was general turmoil. All the young people were really scared. He acknowledged that he had erred in this; let us hope it goes well again.

It is important that we are vigilant so that the devil gains no influence in the church.

It was a great comfort for me to read your last article, “Money for God’s Cause.” Not because you agreed with me — for I am quite accustomed to opposition from every direction — but because God’s cause got a push in the right direction through this, too. If, without compromise, with no respect of persons, and with no regard for the flesh in any area, we go on the offensive with the truth, we will soon be invincible. When I read your article, I could see some fruit in this direction. I was glad to see that. I don’t want to boast beyond measure, yet I dare say that since receiving God’s Spirit I have always endeavored to be pleasing to God, and all along I have had a loathing for pleasing men. This has brought me such rich rewards that my heart leaps for joy over the fact that none of these carnal people have had the satisfaction of overpowering me. Rather, these words of Scripture have always been fulfilled: “ ‘No weapon formed against you shall prosper, and every tongue which rises against you in judgment you shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord, and their righteousness is from Me,’ says the Lord.” Isaiah 54:17. Doesn’t this gladden our hearts? Indeed, it does! If we fail to conquer them, they will gouge out our eyes and spit in our face. They can do this to our bodies (God permitting), but they must never overcome our spirit. Therefore, swing the sword with no respect of persons, for the Father is glorified when we bear much fruit. If such things “can easily be misunderstood,” as X said, I am only too happy in this case to be misunderstood.

Greetings with Psalm 149. Your brother, safely resting in the love and power of Christ,

Johan





Horten, April 26, 1908 — # 57


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and precious peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of Jesus Christ our Lord! I would fall away from God if I sought to please people. I understand very well that there is a gulf between brother P. and myself; he understands this, too, I think. To smooth over this gulf would be apostasy.

My task is to stand before God and to do His work. We mustn’t assume that all those we meet, or who come from far away to listen, can or will receive the testimony that God has given us to proclaim.

Entering the sanctuary requires death. If we think we can enter there without going through death, we will be disappointed time and time again. But we have to persevere until we learn. If we want to be like Jesus, we must take up our cross and follow Him. To be sure, hearts can burn when the Scriptures are opened, but the usual feelings soon return.

God must be allowed to guide our ways according to His counsel. He understands best what we need. There are many things that must be pruned away from us. We are certainly not as mature as we would like to believe; no, God deals with us a little at a time. We have to be obedient to the Spirit in every point in our life, for only then do we have power. God’s kingdom consists not of words, nor the doctrine of redemption, nor the baptism of the Spirit — but of power. It is no use boasting about all our blessings if we don’t continue to be consecrated to the Lord. We must also keep ourselves pure from the dead world, even if it means our own relatives according to the flesh. We have now become the family of Christ and the offspring of Abraham, being baptized by one Spirit into one body. This body is the seed of Abraham. We are flesh of His flesh. Our bodies are the members of Christ. All those who are not baptized in this Spirit do not belong to the body, nor are they children of Abraham, even if they are Jews by birth.

Hearty greetings to all of you with Leviticus 20:26.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 10, 1908 — # 58


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus our Lord!

The power of His might and His riches in goodness make us what we ought to be.

Thank you very much for your letter, which I received today. It makes me very happy that you want to have fellowship with Christ in His sufferings. Most believers only want to share His joy, but they are enemies of His cross. If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. If suffering can increase our hope of glory, then why not — like Christ — suffer patiently for the joy that is set before us? Read the translated article by F. B. Meyer in the latest issue of Misjonæren, and you will see that he writes about the matters we have spoken of so often.

I have received two letters from brother P. since he returned to Denmark. I have written two letters to him, pointing out that he must offer up everything into the death of Christ: family relationships, friendships, his publication — yes, everything. He often spoke about his “good friends” (important people according to the flesh). In Moss he spoke about the same thing to W. I was standing close by when he did, so I spoke up at once, saying that to practice respect of persons consciously is conscious sin, that only a new creation counts, and that everything else has passed away in the death of Christ. Brother W. looked down; he probably thought I was being harsh. But brother P. took it well, and I haven’t heard him say anything like that again. Now I have written to him about this quite frankly, and it was with much joy that I recently received his reply, acknowledging that what I wrote about him was true. He wanted to read through my letters several times and find out what needed to be corrected in his life. Since then, God has given me an entrance into brother P.’s heart. He has great confidence in me. While he was here, he felt he had to be around me as much as possible, and he didn’t want to leave Horten unless I went with him. The problem is, he is surrounded by quite a few people who are hindering him from going completely outside the camp. The most important thing now is to save him like a brand plucked from the fire, because he is a “Cornelius” who prays much and gives alms. In my next letter to him I intend to point out all these “sharks” that are circling around him seeking to bind him and hinder him, because he is probably not even aware of it.

Now I understand clearly that it was God’s will that he should come here. I have had an intense battle for him in my spirit, and that doesn’t happen unless there is a reason. God has now given me such a grip on him that he is even able to endure contradiction. All those around him would like to hinder me from coming to Denmark this autumn, and despite the fact that he owns the businesses, they say there are plenty of assistants everywhere. The point is, I need to have work in order to apply for a leave of absence for three months. But in any case they can gladly keep their things for themselves, because I don’t need any of them and have no intention of forcing my way into another man’s business. If it is God’s will for me to go to Copenhagen, I’ll get there, even if there are as many devils as there are roof tiles, as Luther put it. Pray that brother P. might be plucked like a brand from the fire, that he might be saved like a camel through the eye of a needle. For the poor, the gate is narrow that leads to life, but for the rich, it becomes the eye of a needle. Nevertheless, God is mighty.

I hear there is opposition from X, and that doesn’t surprise me. The bear longs for its old lair; the rod that was bent tries to straighten up. What begins as a small deviation from the way becomes increasingly pronounced. It is vital that we stand firm in those things we have heard from the beginning and not compromise on any point — not back down an inch, but stand before God’s face. Jeremiah 35:19. I once tried giving in a bit in order to be less harsh, but this tactic caused me to lose power. It just made me an object of scorn for those I gave in to. But this happened before I became better grounded. So now I am extremely careful in this matter of yielding to others, because I know that for me this would mean falling away from the Lord, from whom I have received my ministry. And that’s why I dared not do anything but speak bluntly to brother P. To draw back is apostasy! Our duty is to preach what God wants and not what we want. We can be as wise as serpents and harmless as doves, but we must never forsake the truth in our hearts. Once we do, we lose our power. It is no doubt a hard trial for you now, but you must never give in to them. They must return to you. It is possible to show love and still remain faithful to the truth. The one to whom God gives responsibility is also given the power to bear it. We have no say in that matter. Do your work for God and not for men, and then not even the manifold hosts of hell will be able to remove you from your work in Christ Jesus. Stand firm as an ambassador for the Lord, as one who abides in His secret counsels, as one who cannot be toppled over. If you retreat even the slightest bit from this ministry, or if you give in, you’re finished. God will mightily strengthen you and give you grace in all things.

I’m on board the ship during the day. We leave on the 20th.

Sincere greetings in Christ Jesus with Ezekiel 44:16. Greet the brothers and sisters, and greetings to those who are at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 27, 1908 — # 59


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus, the Beloved. Thank you for your good letter, which I received yesterday while I was on leave. It is a great joy to see your progress in the knowledge of God. In order to win that knowledge, Paul counted everything as loss and dung. In particular, it was a joy to see your understanding of sin outside the body and the cleansing inside the body. Christ came with the body. All sin is outside the body of Christ. The Lord is for the body, and the body is for the Lord. The body first became manifest when the law was given, for all sin that is outside the body became known when the light of the law exposed it. But that’s not all: the body itself also became known. Therefore, it is written that the patriarchs knew Him as a great, almighty God, but in the wilderness He manifested Himself as Lord (the Lord has a body). In our inner being He manifests Himself as Father.

We are baptized by one Spirit into one body. In this body the work of Christ takes place, a work that angels long to look into. The light outside the body (the law) judges sin that is outside the body, but the light within the body judges sin that is within the body. Light outside the body makes people “cold planets,” who receive their light from without (e.g., the moon, the Earth, Mars, Jupiter, the asteroids, Venus, Mercury, etc.), but the light in the body makes us stars, which are self-illuminating. The former have an earthly calling, the latter a heavenly calling. The former are found at the foot of the cross, whereas the latter are crucified with Him. The former are Jews (spiritually speaking) for whom Jesus is king; the latter possess the kingship with Him. The more light we appropriate by acknowledgment, the more people we will rule over in eternity. The one who possesses the greater light absorbs those who have less and extends his horizon of light even further. Therefore, a lesser light can never reign over a greater. Christ has received a perfect light into His body; therefore, He will rule over all. The sun has sunspots, but the Sun of Righteousness (Christ) is without spot. We, however, certainly have many “sunspots” that must be removed.

Our entrance is through the veil — that is, His flesh. Suffering with Christ and being judged and crushed with Him will work together for our sanctification. Those who draw back from suffering are enemies of the cross of Christ. Such people are only too happy to rejoice together with Christ, but not to suffer together with Him. A person can have known the power of His resurrection and still draw back from the fellowship of His sufferings — in other words, be an enemy of the cross of Christ. Such people are always talking about their joy, but such joy is disgusting, because it is not pure. We must stand firm in the light God has given us and take God’s kingdom by force. If anyone wants to indulge his flesh and his belly, he will be left behind. He can’t keep up in this race, because love for the flesh hinders him. This love is of the devil, and always has been. But still there are some who whine and stubbornly insist that it is God’s love.

It has become important for me to press into Christ as much as I possibly can — press into His sufferings and power, into the light of His knowledge; for I have in truth learned to count everything as loss for the surpassing worth of possessing the knowledge of God. On board the Tordenskiold God gave me victory when I took up the battle. Here on board He gives me victory when I pray for my superiors and subordinates, and when I remain silent in situations where I used to go on the attack. God gives victory in different ways. The battle may be waged in many different ways, but victory and the victor’s prize will be won — one way or another. The deeper we press into Christ, the longer and deeper our work in Him will be.

We are kept for the work that God has ordained. If we plant a mine near the surface, it will do a superficial work. But if we plant it deep, it will do a deep work. God has never let anyone be put to shame. However, the greater the task, the greater the training and the longer the education. We ourselves are God’s workmanship. We must make a distinction between God’s work in us and our work in Christ. The potter must first form the vessel before the vessel can be of use. The finer the vessel, the more work and time must be spent on it, but the more honor it brings to the potter who made it. A person is honored according to his work. Therefore, God is honored most when we allow Him to mold us as much as possible. Then we will glorify God with our life, just as Christ did with His. If we honor God, God will honor us, for we will receive honor according to how we have been formed.

Our entire life must consist of a series of victories. No one must ever be allowed to overcome us. We must conquer when we have been struck, and we must conquer when we strike, for the blows of the righteous man bring healing. We have a personal God and a personal responsibility, so we must always be pleasing to Him, whether by our life or by our death. If we live, we live to the Lord; if we die, we die to the Lord. Whether we live or whether we die, we are in the body. Therefore, it is written: “Those who have fallen asleep in Christ.”

God wants to decide in your life and your work. Just commit everything to Him and be obedient in everything without asking why. The mind of the Spirit is peace and joy; this is characteristic of God’s will. Right now I am sitting in my cabin on board and writing this letter. This is the first time I have had a room of my own on board a ship — how good it is!

You mention that there are some who cannot seem to keep up. We can’t let such people hold us back. They are more of a hindrance than a help. They are always getting offended over one thing or another. And we will never be able to satisfy all their demands. They have their appointed time and their part to play, but they don’t make progress. They could well be called first cousins of “false liberty,” for these, too, went astray by being enemies of the cross of Christ. When fruit is ripe, it drops. Likewise, these people will “drop off” when they are ripe. In the meantime, we must keep ourselves pure from these vessels of dishonor.

I’ll close for now with a loving greeting to you and everyone at home with Zephaniah 3:12.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, June 2, 1908 — # 60


My dear Parents,

I am on board the Sleipner. God upholds me mightily, day by day. To be sure, we live in crowded quarters here, but it has to be that way if I am to be molded into what God wants me to be. All things work together for our good. The clay cannot have an opinion about how it should be handled. We must simply take everything as from God, whether it be good or bad. We can be sure that in everything He works for our very best, even though that work may be beyond our field of vision and beyond the limits of our understanding. That is exactly how He proves that He is so much greater than we — that He can work with us even when we cannot yet understand the purpose of His work. So we see that we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus (the body) for good works. We are being molded so that we can carry out these good works, and the One who first accomplishes this good work with us is God Himself. He who sanctifies and those who are being sanctified are all of One (God), for which reason He is not ashamed to call us brethren. However, the fact that God equips a person for good works is in itself a good work. God’s work is tried and finished when we carry it out. Every good work has been foreordained by God Himself, and we are to walk in them. All of this was first accomplished in Christ. The Spirit of God, in Christ Jesus, works through the whole body. Thus, at every point within the body, the devil loses the battle, and he has to retreat before the Spirit of God that now dwells bodily in Christ.

For the newly converted, He is the fair Morning Star; for the perfect, He is the noonday Sun; and for everyone, He is all in all. He is a cold planet for the one who is under the law; for the one who is crucified with Him, He is a bright and shining Star which increases in splendor as he progresses in Christ. All this in one and the same person! Everything perishable has been subjected to the person of Christ, in order to bring everything back to the imperishable — the One with whom there is no variation or shadow of turning. Therefore, the Mediator is not just for one, but God is one. We who are on the way are subject to the laws of transformation in Christ; we are transformed into Christ’s image from glory to glory. But the one who is to be transformed cannot judge the One who transforms him; therefore we should suffer patiently and commit our souls to God in doing good.

Many enemies of the cross of Christ have arisen since the recent outpouring of the Spirit. If we want to share Christ’s joy, we must also be prepared to share His sufferings. Mark those who are content with the baptism in the Spirit and are not willing to suffer with Christ. Their end is corruption and their god is their belly. Don’t blindly accept everything they come up with, because their nearest kinsmen have gone before them in this false liberty. Their rejoicing is nauseating, and their shouts of “Hallelujah” grate on the ear. Each one must form his own opinion about these things; but what one sees, one must proclaim.

Little Johanne just can’t figure out why sometimes I am home for awhile and other times I am away again. She is really fond of me and throws her arms around me as soon as I come ashore for a visit. Kristian is a clever boy. Rakel laughs and smiles at us. Brother Berg is sailing as second mate in the merchant Navy with the SS Union to England. Brother Ellefsen is on leave and is currently working as a draftsman near Mjøsen. The meetings are about as usual. God is using a naval seaman (a married man) to lead the meetings. He has received extraordinary wisdom from God, so much so that he never ceases to amaze me.

Loving greetings from your son and brother with Numbers 31:23.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, second day of Pentecost, 1908 — # 61


My dear Parents,

Congratulations on your 40th wedding anniversary on the 7th of June, as well as Father’s birthday. The years hasten toward eternity; our hourglass will soon have run out here on earth. Therefore, we should direct all our works toward the one eternal and immutable goal. And though we die, yet shall we live. Our departure from this world will be our exit from the corruptible and our entrance to the incorruptible. Grey hair is a crown of glory on the head of the righteous. Therefore, we can run quickly on this way that has been opened, a way that extends even beyond the realm of corruptible things and leads us into the eternal dwelling places. Nothing will be able to hinder our progress on this way, provided we are willing to walk upon it.

Yesterday I had shore leave and met together with a few people in my living room. A man from Skien was also present. We spoke about Romans 8, and the Spirit of God shed such glorious light on it that we were all amazed and rejoiced greatly. There are several here in Horten who are no longer content with superficial joy. They long to be established in the Word of God, and they find no nourishment outside of it. Our best meetings have been informal conversation meetings, where the Spirit of God reveals to us the glory of Christ in a remarkable way, so our hearts begin to burn within us. For the mysteries of Christ to come forth, great inner peace and self-control are required; but several have now learned the art of speaking up when something threatens to disrupt God’s work.

It is only by the greatest peace of mind and the greatest anticipation of and longing for light from God in every matter that the Spirit can reveal His mysteries to us. The Spirit withdraws instantly when foolishness begins to reign. The Spirit, the One who reveals God’s wisdom, is extremely sensitive and withdraws at the slightest hint of discord. Much training is required in an assembly where God’s wisdom is to work. The Spirit of God can inspire joy in the midst of the worst tumult, but the Spirit is exceedingly sensitive when it comes to imparting God’s wisdom. It is absolutely essential that we take this to heart.

The Spirit can be present in many different forms. Among beginners He can bring forth joy, among the more mature, instruction, etc. Therefore we should not rest content with a joy that is superficial, but seek to lay hold of the joy of wisdom, which is perfect. I can only write imperfectly about this, but I hope you can read between the lines.

Paul labored according to the power of Him who worked in him mightily, to present every man perfect in Christ. We ought to labor in the same way, for we have become subject to the life-giving laws of development in Christ Jesus. Flowers are subject to the laws of development, just as we are in Christ. The sinner is subject to the laws of development leading to death, but we to the laws of development leading to life. What glory! When the ungodly blossom, it leads to death, but when the righteous blossom, it leads to life. The glory that transforms us makes us identical with itself. Just as the glory dwells in the body, our objective also dwells in the body. But the body is the Lord’s, and He is the Savior of His body [Colossians 1:18–19 and 2:9–10]. What Peter and the other apostles understood, they understood through God’s wisdom, and this wisdom dwells in Christ bodily. By the same Spirit we can understand what the apostles understood, for God is no respecter of persons. Flesh is flesh, and Spirit is Spirit.

Power comes from fellowship with God, but unfaithfulness breaks fellowship, and thus power is also lost. (Remember Samson.)

Intimate fellowship leads us into the counsels of God, and by our association with this “Supreme Court of heaven” we become steadfast, independent, and sure of victory.

I’d better close for now. God always gives me victory in Christ. I can rejoice in His fellowship even here on board.

Please greet everyone at home with Psalm 19:7–11.

Your son and brother,

Johan





Horten, June 22, 1908 — # 62


Dear Brother Aksel,

Yesterday one of my colleagues on land asked an officer here on board how he liked sailing with me, whether he was being inundated with religious talk, etc. The officer said that the gunnery officer on board the Sleipner [i.e., brother Smith] was the most upright man he had ever sailed with. The officer related this to me today, and it was — without his knowing it — a great comfort to me, for it testified to the fact that they had heard something. Whether I am praised or faulted is immaterial to me, as long as the testimony they give points toward the goal in every circumstance. I feel that it is best to be weak, but one can’t even lay hold of weakness by oneself. Weakness gives strength, but strength finds an outlet, like steam; so one can also go too far. But that feeling within of having gone too far makes one weak again. This begins a process that gains momentum with time, so that our weakness becomes so great that we come to the realization that we live and breathe solely and completely by God’s power. The more spiritual we become, the more judgment, the more weakness, and the more power. Power manifests itself most often through our silence; then we come across as incompetent, which is a hard trial for the flesh. The light shines from behind and from ahead, from beneath and from above. We see in part and speak in part, so that in circumstances in which we cause offense we get to know ourselves and the power which has saved us in such detail. Moreover, we become acquainted with the grace we partake of through God’s longsuffering with us. As a rule, one runs aground only in new and uncharted seas. Nonetheless, the course is charted now, so we can navigate ahead with all vigilance and discernment. Naval life has been of inestimable profit to me. All things work together for our good. I have requested one thing of God: that I might press on in Him — that I might receive judgment, suffering, and light — not to crush me, but to clear the path ahead of me. I have written to brother P. and have expressed myself quite frankly. This affected him so deeply that he said he would bring my letter before God. However, in his last letter, he was friendlier than ever. He had begun to regret having invited me to Denmark. I wrote back that trips to Denmark were not all that unusual for me, that I wasn’t “itching” to take a trip for pleasure. He also wrote that in Denmark people would not accept correction, that it was useless to come and try to chastise them; to which I replied that I had never heard of the clay having an opinion about how the potter should mold it. He himself admitted that the Danish people haven’t been molded to be what God would have them be. After some back and forth, we have become better friends than ever. Moreover, I comforted him by saying that I would definitely not come to Denmark unless it was clearly God’s will — and even then I would only apply for a month’s leave. This calmed his fears and put him considerably more at ease. He had been afraid that I would come to Denmark and only cause trouble — and for six whole months, at that!

Many greetings to those who are at home, and greetings with Isaiah 54:17.

Your brother,

Johan





Kiel, June 28, 1908 — # 63


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter before leaving Horten. It has always been a joy — especially lately — to see your progress in Christ Jesus, to see that you love fellowship with Him, not only in joy, but also in suffering; because only in this way do we prove that we love Him. This suffering is hidden; consequently, the glory it brings us is also hidden. This is the hidden manna. Suffering always accompanies the hidden works that are wrought in Christ. The human way of doing things is to show off before other people.

In Ezekiel 44, from verse 10, we read about two kinds of priests. Some were only allowed to serve at the gates of the house or in the house itself, whereas others were allowed to serve before the Lord. That’s how it is to this very day. There are those who serve only at the gate. They preach day and night about the first principles of Christ; or they serve in the house — that is to say, they are constantly striving to abstain from dead works. This is a ministry for the people outside, which is also why they become so well known among people, and that’s perhaps their primary hindrance to going deeper into Christ. This is a ministry in Christ carried out with one’s face turned toward the people.

The priests mentioned in verse 15 had quite a different ministry. Their faces were turned toward God, and they ministered before Him. These are the ones who look steadfastly into the law of liberty and offer themselves with Christ before God’s face. To serve in the sanctuary one must be clothed in pure linen, but when one goes before the people, one must take off the consecrated vestments and put on other clothes. God wants this intimate relationship to be hidden from other people. These priests are the ones who are versed in the law and can pronounce judgment. They are the ones who can teach His people to distinguish between the pure and the impure, between the holy and the profane.

As you develop more and more in this latter priestly ministry, rejoice and be glad! Though you only show your ordinary side to people, you can rejoice before God in white linen and eat of the hidden manna there. There is a certain carnal tendency within us to want to minister to the people and be esteemed by them. To minister before the Lord doesn’t give our flesh the slightest satisfaction. We become an enigma.

Persevere in this ministry. Before the Lord we learn all kinds of things and are transformed according to the image we behold. Those who serve at the gate never come any further. They are constantly taken up with the first principles, year after year. They talk solely about the cleansing of the house — purification from dead works. It is no light punishment to be stuck there! These are the very people who by that time ought to have become teachers; instead, they hardly know the first principles. They are superficial extroverts who are always concerned about what other people think, who can never learn to turn their gaze to the things that are more perfect.

So then, our ministry is now before the face of God; accordingly, we reason, judge, and understand. Here before Him we receive our light, our judgment — indeed, everything. This is what it means to come to God, the Judge of all. The one on whom judgment is passed is always inferior to the one who passes judgment. Christ manifests His greatness by being Judge of all. He reigns over the living and the dead, and all judgment has been committed to Him.

Perfect light brings perfect judgment. Perfect judgment, in turn, brings perfect dominion. We conclude from this that the extent to which Christ has been able to make us light is the extent to which we shall judge with Him and reign with Him. To the degree that my self-life is crushed in me, I can reign with Him over others whose self-life hasn’t been crushed as much as mine. This is a wise and just arrangement. In Christ all flesh received its death sentence. As the Son of Man, He was completely victorious in all the trials of life; therefore, authority has been granted Him to pass judgment on everyone. As the One who fulfilled the requirements of the law, He is the king of the Jews. He is supreme.

It gives me great pleasure to write to you about these things, since I know you love God’s truths and have determined to go deeper into Christ than just being a doorkeeper.

What a shame that these men-pleasers can’t learn! No doubt, it is their flesh making its demands. They love mass meetings and large assemblies, but they know little about intimate communion with God before His face.

“The mystery which has been hidden from ages and from generations, but now has been revealed to His saints.” Colossians 1:26. This mystery is revealed in the Spirit, and it remains a mystery to this very day for all those who have not sought the enlightenment of the Spirit. These things are also a mystery for those who continue to dwell on the first principles. Even for those of us who are diligently searching out the treasures of wisdom by the Spirit, many mysteries still remain hidden, for God has never allowed any human being to understand His works fully. But all God’s works have taken place by Christ and for Christ.

You write: “There is something in the wind.” Yes, I have noticed the same thing in Horten and elsewhere. I believe we ought to steer a steady course and continue in our appointed ministry before God’s face — not compromising in any area, but remaining faithful in the light God has given, even if everything seems to be going awry. We must simply obey the Spirit, without the slightest regard for people. Whatever cannot stand, let it fall. We must be prepared to intervene as the need arises — whenever, wherever, whoever. The Spirit must have free reign with us, and we needn’t fear the consequences.

Paul’s epistles are weighty and radical, but his bodily presence was frail and his speech was considered contemptible. In this we see the hidden life and the hidden strength. Those “wise” men of Corinth were only looking on the surface of things, of course — at what was “great.” Although Paul was not a trained speaker, he was no novice in the knowledge of God. Naturally, those carnal people only paid attention to his unskilled speech, and not to the knowledge behind the words; that’s why they despised it. The world is teeming with many such superficial people. And yet God delights in hiding the most profound and subtle truths in unskilled speech, so that those who have a childlike faith can understand, and those who are “wise” will be thoroughly put off by such speaking and turn away. Hallelujah! How great our God is, who has everything worked out so exactly!

I’d better stop for now. It would be good to get together this coming autumn, God willing. From here I’m off to Libau. I won’t be going to Copenhagen.

Please greet everyone at home.

Your brother, sharing with you in Christ,

Johan





Flekkefjord, July 28, 1908 — # 64


Dear Brother Aksel

I received your very good letter, in which you wrote about various situations among the brothers and sisters, who maintain that they have no need to be taught, since they are all taught by God. In John 6:45, where this is mentioned, we read: “It is written in the prophets, ‘And they shall be taught by God.’ Therefore everyone who has heard and learned from the Father comes to Me.” We have all been taught by the Father to come to the Son. The Father is the Spirit in His fullness who convicts the world concerning sin, righteousness, and judgment. It was before we came to the Son that we were taught by God. But everyone who hears the Father and learns from Him comes to the Son, who in turn is the way to the Father. In the Son there is exhortation and instruction. The body (the church) “is joined and knit together by every band that He supplies, and grows as a body unto its edification in love, in accordance with the effective working that is apportioned to each member individually.” Ephesians 4:16 [Norw.]. Before we come to Christ, God Himself is our teacher; but after we come to the Son (to the church, which is His body), God has given us “some to be apostles, some prophets, some evangelists, and some pastors and teachers, for the equipping of the saints for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ.” Ephesians 4:11–13.

God’s Spirit rests over all flesh, convicting those who live in sin. In this sense we are all taught by God. The Spirit can do this work as a result of the death and resurrection of Christ. But once this work of conviction has taken place and we have come into the body, which is His church, we must submit to the order God has ordained in the church, and it is written expressly that He has appointed teachers in the church. Of course it is simply ignorance and distortion of the Scriptures that leads people to this delusion that even in the church they can continue to be “taught by God alone.” Everything is of God — both those who teach and those who are taught, but there must be order and direction in everything. The one who despises God’s witnesses despises God Himself.

“But you, do not be called ‘Rabbi’; for One is your Teacher, the Christ.” This was said in order to expose those who are carnal teachers, who seek their own honor. Clearly, such people have not been appointed by God, and these words of Jesus bring them to silence. Paul said concerning himself that he was a teacher for the Gentiles in Spirit and in truth. But he was not interested in being acclaimed or in being called “teacher” or “Rabbi.” The very fact that he was a teacher in Spirit and in truth precluded this.

There is a great deal of activity in the body of Christ. In this body, some members are more mature than others. Those who are taught by God to come to the Son are being pointed in the direction of Christ’s death and atonement, whereas those who are taught in the church are being pointed in the direction of the Father — that is, toward perfection. We must make a distinction between these two types of teaching if we want to learn anything at all. Those who insist that they are taught by God would, accordingly, be outside Christ altogether, or just at the entrance to Him, because after we come to Christ we are guided into all truth by the chosen instruments of the Spirit.

God has ordained prophets in the church, who have a personal communion with the Spirit and receive revelations from the Spirit. These, in turn, teach the people. There were such prophets in the church in Antioch. We are to leave things in the church just as God ordained them. Even though we might wish that it were otherwise, our wishes are futile in the face of God’s ordained plan. He who ordains, ordains whomever He wills for whatever He wills; and though Satan rages, he can do nothing to change God’s divine arrangement! To rest content and be satisfied with everything the way it is, casting all our cares and worries on the Lord, is the best thing we can possibly do. It is just as futile to try and thwart God’s plans and His divine order as it is to seethe with lifelong resentment over the fact that we are not the king of Norway!

We don’t walk in darkness but in light, so we have nothing to hide. For this reason it would be good if you could read this letter aloud at a meeting at R.’s, and let those who get angry, be angry; and those who are glad, let them rejoice; for we ought to test everything and hold fast to what is good.

It is good to trust in God completely and give Him our wholehearted “yes.”

It was a real blessing to have the opportunity to speak about Jesus last Sunday morning at the Baptist church in Arendal. When they heard that I was the son of Mr. Smith in Kristiansand, the pastor said: “That doesn’t surprise me!” The fact is, God’s Spirit was upon me mightily, and the congregation listened with rapt attention. After being on board ship for a time, it is a blessed relief to be able to speak a little about Christ Jesus.

Greetings to all the brothers and sisters and everyone at home with Ephesians 4:4, and greetings to you personally with 1 Timothy 6:3–5.

Your brother,

Johan





Molde, August 8, 1908 — # 65


My dear Family,

God’s grace and peace!

His divine power has granted us everything that pertains to life and godliness. For this we owe Him a debt of gratitude. Jesus is the grain of wheat that fell into the ground and bore much fruit. We, too, are to ripen in the ear and then, as mature grains of wheat, fall into the ground and die in order to bear fruit for God. The fact that the grain of wheat dies and provides life for the next generation means that it actually comes to life again — it lives on in the younger generations. Otherwise, what would be the meaning of Abraham receiving the promise that his seed would become as numerous as the sand of the sea, if his life could not “reappear” in “the many”? Therefore, those of us who have the life and faith of Abraham are the children of Abraham. The dead grain of wheat no longer lives itself, but it does live on in its offspring — “the many.” When the seed is still in the ear or in the barn, it is alone and lives by itself. It has to die in order to bring forth fruit. But when that which is dead germinates, it has become one of the true fathers, having laid down its life for the crop to come.

We have to go deep into the ground in order to suffer and die with Christ and thus bear fruit. The fruit that subsequently comes up from the ground is nothing less than life out of death. But one doesn’t praise the old grain of wheat for the new life that has come forth. The old grain of wheat is dead and cannot be praised. It sacrificed its life — and with it, its honor and its all; now it only bears fruit. Those who have the faith of Abraham are Abraham’s children. Just as the first grain of wheat fell into the ground and bore fruit, this same process repeats itself from one generation to the next. That’s why Jesus said that the world is God’s field. The first-fruits is Christ.

We read in Isaiah 54:7: “For a mere moment I have forsaken you, but with great mercies I will gather you.” The expression “gather you” suggests several (grains of wheat). “Why are you persecuting Me?” Jesus asked Saul of Tarsus. Once again we see Jesus’ life in the many. Of course, it is possible to be saved as a single grain of wheat without ever suffering and dying; one is, after all, still a grain of wheat. But if we are laid to rest deep in the soil with Christ, suffering with Him and dying with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. Isn’t it so that a father with many obedient children is honored and respected more than an old bachelor? And isn’t being a forefather in eternity greater than merely being saved as an individual? “Most assuredly, I say to you, unless a grain of wheat falls into the ground and dies, it remains alone; but if it dies, it produces much fruit.”

The grain of wheat doesn’t struggle or strive while it lies in the ground. It only has to lie there quietly and suffer, burst open, and bear fruit in patience. Therefore, the grain of wheat will be granted a portion with the many, because He poured out His soul to death. Isaiah 53:12.

We have just anchored at Molde, and I have been granted shore leave. We passed by Ålesund today; it was a beautiful sight from the sea. I have written to brother P., saying that I probably won’t be going to Copenhagen in the autumn. God will not put me to shame, nor will He make me a fool for the sake of the mammon of this world; but He will give me power to keep even the rich in their place. The person who has a good reputation is great, and a rich man is powerful; but no one is greater than the one who fears the Lord, for a godfearing man dares not trust anyone but his God. Therefore, let us pursue the best. Loving greetings to all of you with Isaiah 54:2–6.

Your son and brother,

Johan





Haugesund, August 11, 1908 — # 66


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus!

Thank you so much for your good letter, which I received in Stavanger. It gives me such joy to see that the brothers and sisters are becoming more and more reconciled to the sufferings of Christ. Jesus suffered most after He had done powerful works and the people had exalted Him. Read Luke 9, from verse 42. Here He was the object of the people’s admiration, yet He was quick to remind the disciples that the Son of Man would be delivered into the hands of men. With this, He was saying: “the honor they are giving me now is of very short duration; soon they’re going to kill me.” We can see something similar in Luke 9:20, where Peter says, “You are the Christ of God.” Jesus immediately responded by saying that He would be rejected by the elders, high priests, and scribes, and be slain. Jesus’ joy over being the Christ of God could not be complete

without sufferings and death. Whenever Jesus encountered opposition after doing mighty works, He began to teach or instruct the people.

From this we can learn not to receive honor from people, because their honor is so short-lived; the next moment they will spit on us. If we are honored, we need to remind ourselves that we, like the Master, are to learn obedience through what we suffer; and since the Pioneer of our salvation was perfected through sufferings, we too are to be perfected by and through sufferings.

“For everyone will be seasoned with fire, and every sacrifice will be seasoned with salt. Salt is good, but if the salt loses its flavor, how will you season it? Have salt in yourselves, and have peace with one another.” Mark 9:49–50.

It is especially the last part that we ought to pay attention to. If we are suffering and the salt stings our flesh, we ought not to push this suffering over onto others. If we do that, we will only reap unrest.

You must keep this suffering and this salt to yourself, and keep peace with one another. The way of the natural man is to share his sufferings with others, but we have no right to do that. Jesus trod the winepress alone. By contrast, the rich man was compelled to suffer alone. He tried to share his sufferings with Lazarus, but to no avail. To preach the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings as a general truth is permissible, but to proclaim one’s own sufferings in order to gain relief and sympathy is not. My personal experience has been that no one has been able to comfort me in my sufferings; people have just considered the whole thing to be foolishness. I have had to keep the matter between myself and God, and then I have received comfort from Him.

Since the brothers and sisters have begun to enter into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings, these things should be of interest; because in both joy and suffering it is so easy to deviate and thereby gratify the flesh. When we suffer, we ought to suffer alone and suffer to the end — not halfway. Christ didn’t burden His disciples with His sufferings. So, to suffer with Christ means to suffer by yourself — alone — just as He suffered. Drawing back from the sufferings makes one an enemy of the cross of Christ. It is important to have counted the cost. If we share in the sufferings, we also share in the comfort. This brings deliverance from death.

We are baptized by one Spirit into one body. The same suffering takes place in our flesh as took place in the flesh of Christ, because we are flesh of His flesh. The same Spirit that was in Christ is in us. This Spirit has led the flesh into death before, and thus is able to lead us through death also. We can go through the veil, which is His flesh. These truths are true both in Him and in us. The resurrection of the dead will show how closely each one of us has followed his Lord and Master, for to one is given the glory of the sun, another the glory of the moon, and one star differs from another star in glory.

We need much quietness in order to meditate on the law of the Lord day and night. We need to train our ear to hear what the Spirit is saying to the church. We must avoid becoming preoccupied with all the outward manifestations of religion, because it is Jesus Himself we need.

Fellowship with Him is fellowship with Life. Fellowship with Him makes us like Him.

The anchor of our hope has been cast behind the veil — that is, His flesh. By hauling in on the chain (sufferings), we enter in — inch by inch.

Compared to the sufferings, the comfort in Christ is abundant indeed. It is so overwhelming that we can rejoice and feel quite content in all kinds of trials.

Your letters are always so refreshing. You can be sure that your labor in Christ is not in vain.

I have no special news to tell. We are steaming along the coast; we anchor each night. Right now we’re just north of Haugesund. Kristian, Johanne, and Rakel are fine. When Johanne sees any of the naval officers in our neighborhood returning from their ship, she runs so hard that she gets all out of breath, because “now Papa is coming home too,” she says. Kristian can’t understand why I have to keep going away.

Greetings to you and to everyone at home from your brother, partaking in the power of Christ’s resurrection and the fellowship of His sufferings,

Johan





August 15, 1908 — # 67


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace is new every morning, and we can always rejoice in God’s salvation. Here on the ship God’s grace has been with me mightily. He has upheld me in everything, so I have been able to lead a quiet and peaceable life. The books by Jessie Penn-Lewis that you gave me are excellent; I have read them several times. It is a pleasure to read many things there that God has also revealed to us. In 2 Corinthians 5:19 it is written that God has committed to us the word of reconciliation. This is the word of the cross, for on the cross He abolished the enmity and made the two one. In other words, God has committed the word of the cross to us, which is a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Gentiles. But to us who believe, it is the power of God. So, God has entrusted us with His power; He has given us His Holy Spirit. Jesus offered Himself in the power of the eternal Spirit, and in the power of that Spirit we, too, can offer ourselves. We are members of His body and are sacrificed in the power of the eternal Spirit. This sacrifice is pleasing to God, and we can go through the veil — that is, His flesh. “For a testament is in force after men are dead, since it has no power at all while the testator lives.” But He who established the cross and death in the body has also established life there. For it is written that everyone who believes in Christ has passed from death to life. “Do you not know yourselves, that Jesus Christ is in you?” We are all children of God through faith in His name, and God doesn’t have dead children but living ones. “For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made me free from the law of sin and death.” The process of death and suffering which is now taking place in our body pertains entirely to our earthly body. Jesus trod the winepress alone. We must suffer alone, individually, to the end, with Christ. This fellowship can only be shared by two — the individual soul, and Jesus — just as it was always Jesus and His Father (the eternal Spirit) in the days of Jesus’ flesh. Because Jesus suffered, He has the right to divide the spoil; yet one thing has already taken place: Christ (the Bridegroom) has left father and mother and has been joined to His wife (the bride) as one flesh. These two shall become one. If it is possible through a chemical process to unite two things, how much more so for God to make the two into one! Ephesians 5, from verse 30.

This suffering and this cross are now being borne in the body of Christ, the body wherein all potential for spiritual development lies, where all the fullness of the Godhead is hidden, and where all the truth that the Spirit possesses, dwells. That is why the world can’t share in this suffering; for one must first be baptized by one Spirit into one body. The entire body of Christ is dead in itself. But it is a part of our education that we walk the way, just like the Master did. We will only receive as much glory in the resurrection as we have gained by our growth in the body in the Lord. By being in the body of Christ we partake of the first resurrection; then the second death has no power over us. But what is the second death? Death and Hades were cast into the lake of fire; this is the second death. But since we are now in the body, and Christ is the Savior of His body, we are saved from the second death, because death no longer has dominion over us. We have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren.

It is common to speak about Christ as our substitute, but that is not entirely correct, for if it were only a matter of Him suffering in our stead, we could remain as we are. No, He’s not just our substitute, He is “the way,” and we have to walk on this “way” ourselves if we want to make progress. We will certainly discover that Christ did not go the way for us so that we could avoid doing so. This is the teaching of those who are enemies of the cross.

Autumn is drawing near. We’ll be joining the squadron on the 26th of this month, and shore leave begins September 26. Right now we’re anchored about six miles north of Stavanger. I doubt that the trip to Copenhagen will materialize, since I do not want to be dependent upon P.’s money. He is not free enough to give this money as though he had not done so.

Hearty greetings to you all with 1 Thessalonians 3:8.

Your brother,

Johan





Lervik, September 2, 1908 — # 68


Dear Brother Aksel,

Today I received your good letter written August 25. I see that you are back from Sommerhjemmet now. According to the Squadron Commander’s orders which came today, we are to leave for Marviken this Saturday. We should arrive there by Monday.

Personally, I benefit most from being alone with God, because one can’t always hear His voice in the streets or in the marketplace. Just as life itself is hidden with Christ in God, His instruction and His work of building us up also take place in secret.

As servants of the Lord, we use our inner senses more and more and our outer senses less and less for all the things that are worldly and unprofitable. In our daily life we must always be vigilant, and even more so when we are together at conferences and meetings. By being superficial, we can very easily lose contact with God, who can give us clarity in every obscure question. When you are together with brothers, it is soulish to want to let yourself go and become completely involved in everything that is going on around you. That doesn’t produce a good result. If we concentrate on maintaining our contact with God instead of being preoccupied with everything that is happening around us, we will have wonderful things revealed to us by Him whose name is Wonderful.

Maintaining contact with God as His child is one thing, but keeping contact with Him with respect to the ministry is another matter. We must make a clear distinction between the two.

Maybe we will be able to get together in Kristiansand. God sustains me here on board, so everything is going well. I prayed that the Lord would allow me to find the right time and place in my ministry. He has answered my prayer, and everything is going perfectly. We serve a mighty God. He wants to help us with details. That’s how He is glorified most. And what is life except details?

Greet those who are at home. Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan





Sandefjord, September 13, 1908 — # 69


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s precious peace!

Thank you for the time we had together. God is good. May His name always be honored through us in Jesus Christ. By His blood all things are reconciled, both in the body and in nature, and are brought into beautiful harmony before the face of God through the Holy Spirit. Therefore, let us strive for a deeper and closer relationship with one another by this blood, always bearing in mind that we also ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. Every valley shall be exalted and every mountain and hill shall be made low, for this way into the sanctuary is open and straight, and no ravenous beast shall go upon it. High-mindedness and despondency meet in the blood of Christ. Through this blood the proud and the timid come together. Here the prince becomes one so beautifully with the slave, and the Jew with the Greek.

The “able seaman” and O. send greetings. Yesterday they went ashore on their own. O. went many places and testified. First he went to a Methodist church, where he met a couple of women with whom he prayed. Then he went on to a cafe. After that, he went to a feast for Christian seamen, which had been arranged for the crew of a large ship that was about to sail for the southern Arctic. At this gathering there were a lot of people, including two pastors. They asked O. to go out into the streets and invite sailors in, so he did. He managed to bring a whole lot of them to the feast. After the pastors spoke, O. was allowed to speak. The Spirit of God was mightily upon him. He was powerfully blessed. Later he gave his testimony at the docks as he was about to board. Now he is seeking God for wisdom to answer each one wisely. The “able seaman” is quieter, but he is holding his own. We have prayer meetings together now and then in my cabin. The other evening Cadet Aslaksen came as well.

I was recently offered a very good position as bookkeeper in the drill house on the naval base. There I could earn a lot more per month and be eligible for government housing as well. But I would have had to work almost every evening, and that would have felt like chains around my feet, so I turned it down. It would only have lasted two years, after which I would have been replaced by another gunnery officer.

We’ve been told that we are going to Oslo. Now O. would like to write a few words to you:

Dear brother in the Lord:

Just a few words from me. The Lord is good and His mercy endures forever. Yes, how true that is. He has been, and still is, good to me. He blesses me more and more with each passing day, and I can feel His everlasting arms always around me. He is my defense in temptation and a protection on the evil day. I was at a wonderful feast for sailors last night. It was a very blessed time, and God’s Spirit was mightily present. Many souls came under conviction because of their sin, and they longed for peace with God. The Lord has promised that His Word will not return void; therefore, I also believe that the seed that was sown yesterday will spring up and bring forth fruit for eternity. God has helped me and used me as His witness. To Him be all the honor and praise. Thanks be to God who gives us the victory through Jesus Christ. Warm greetings to you, brother, and to all His saints in Kristiansand. Pray for us. God is faithful who has promised.

O., No. 73, Sleipner

Greet the brothers and sisters and everyone at home. Rejoice over Psalm 125:1–3. Think especially about the third verse.

Heartiest greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 8, 1908 — # 70


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you very much for your very good letter which I received today. I also received a letter from Father today in which he writes about being sober and watchful. Brother P. wrote a very “affectionate” letter which testified to a genuine love for us in the Spirit. X must also have gained confidence in us in the Lord, because he has advised brother P. to come to Norway now and then to visit us. God’s ways are amazing. Immediately after you left, I wrote to Misjonæren about the situation as it is now. I agree with you completely that God’s people have not been mature enough spiritually to make use of the tremendous spiritual gifts they have sought and received. Now, as opposition arises, it will become apparent that a great many of those who are not mature enough will, because of unbelief, lose the gifts they have received.

This is how things are in nature, too. In the spring the trees are completely covered with blossoms, but when the wind and rain come, many of the blossoms are blown off, and only a small percentage of the flowers bear fruit — even fewer bear fruit that is wholesome and ripe. A great number of these spiritual gifts will probably be “blown away,” but to those who hold firm to God and to what He has bestowed, they will become all the more precious.

Whether the blossoms get blown off or not depends on how firmly they are attached to the tree. It is the same with the gifts. If one has sought the gifts because of ambition, these gifts will be blown away by the first reproach or insult that comes along. But if one has sought the gifts in order to glorify God and build His church, then the gifts remain firmly attached, and they are not easily blown away. God winnows His threshing floor. All this is God’s work. There’s nothing we can do about it. But what we can do is to stand by, observe, and learn from it all. Here, though, Jesus’ words are more fitting than ever: “For whoever has, to him more will be given, and he will have abundance; but whoever does not have, even what he has will be taken away from him.” O how much there is to thank God for!

We have a tremendous task in our time, Aksel. For now the time has come when God can make use of knowledge and understanding, because persecution will make people sober and attentive. Perhaps God has sent you to Oslo so you can live quietly and observe the situation from a distance, where you can discern things even more clearly. Those who persecute do so from a distance; therefore, you need quietness so that you can get a feel for the whole situation.

Halfhearted Christians are left in peace as long as they let the world help them build God’s kingdom. Read Ezra 4:1–2. But as soon as Christians determine to have nothing to do with them, they try to scare and terrify the Lord’s people so that their hands drop, with the result that God’s kingdom cannot be built. Ezra 4:4– 5. The world will gladly help build something for God, as long as it is the type of thing that is an abomination to the Lord. But as soon as God’s people begin to build alone, the world seeks to bring fear and dismay and cause their hands to drop.

In John 2:24–25 it is written: “But Jesus did not commit Himself to them, because He knew all men, and had no need that anyone should testify of man, for He knew what was in man.” Here we have to learn about not committing or entrusting ourselves to those who are able and willing to relate to us solely on a human level. They talk about and praise even the divine life we have received as if it were something human. The flesh profits nothing. Read Job 13:10.

We live quietly and peacefully here. As a rule, I’m off work every other day. God kindles spirit and zeal in my heart to carry out each task, whether in writing or in speaking. After the work is carried out, a quiet rest remains. There is no need to push one another aside, for God has prepared everyone’s works in such a way that each one is able to stay out of the other’s way. We just have to be sure that the works we are doing are “His works.”

Ask Father if 3 John 13 fits him.

Hearty greetings to you and to everyone at home from your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 20, 1908 — # 71


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter.

What the churches need now is revelation by the Spirit in the knowledge of God. We must endeavor to teach the brothers and sisters to find their joy in the revelation of the Scriptures, for this has the power, now as before, to set hearts aflame. For years people have been used to dry “doctrine,” and this is why they shy away from the knowledge of God, not knowing how to make a distinction between the two.

Brother W. wrote that I should be careful what I wrote in the paper. But the fact of the matter is, we don’t have any “movement” to support or defend. Our task is to abide in the truth, even if the “movement” collapses completely around us. Movements come and go, but God’s Word is everlasting. Let us therefore prove what is the good and acceptable will of God and act accordingly. Let us also continually search in the Scriptures to see whether the things we see and hear are in accord with them.

Engrave 1 Samuel 3:10 and Revelation 3:22 deeply into your own heart and into the hearts of the others, because the Lord is the source of all things.

Hearty greetings to everyone at home, to the brothers and sisters, and to you.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 22, 1908 — # 72


Dear Brother Aksel,

I received your very good letter today along with the paper. I have already read through the letter twice. I must grasp the spirit in things. The words in themselves are not the important thing, so I have to read slowly, study, and read again.

You say that an overseer “shall” be the husband of one wife, etc. I looked in the German and English translations and they, too, say “shall” or “must.” The old Norwegian translation uses “ought to,” but the new one uses “shall.” Further on, where it’s written that he should have his children in submission with all reverence, it cannot mean children like mine who are only one-and-a-half and three years old, because they can hardly be said to understand submission or reverence. So it doesn’t look like we can fulfill the conditions for being overseers. What are we to do then? I know of no other solution than to attend to the ministry we have, until we are duly relieved of it.

Paul himself was an overseer of the churches, despite the fact that he was unmarried. Surely he knew what he was doing when he prescribed such ordinances, because he knew from experience just how carnal people are. When he requires that an overseer be the husband of one wife, have submissive children (Titus 1:6, have believing children), etc., he has in mind a person in whom people can have confidence, and on whom they can rely — a man who is not so likely to choose the wrong course. But what if such a man were suddenly to lose his wife? What then? Or what if his children were to die, like all other mortal beings? Then he would no longer satisfy the conditions. What then? Should he resign and go his way? I should think not! If God has placed the reins in his hands, he should keep them as long as he is faithful. For God, the important thing is to find a faithful overseer. If He cannot find someone who exactly fits the description given in the epistles to Titus and Timothy, then He will take another who comes as close as possible, for it is God alone who can appoint shepherds, evangelists, and teachers in His churches. People do the same; if they don’t have a broom to sweep with they take a brush, and if they don’t have a brush, they find something else. What if there were a church that didn’t have anyone who met all these qualifications? Would that mean, then, that that church could not have an overseer? Timothy and Titus were simply being given a clear model of an ideal overseer.

December 23:

Yesterday B. came in and interrupted me, and we had a short but good time together in a room at the back of the house, which I‘d been using as a classroom before Christmas. Several people want to study Norwegian again, but it hinders me from giving my undivided attention to spiritual matters; therefore, I will not begin again after Christmas. Later we will see how God leads.

But now, back to the ministry of an overseer. 1 Timothy 3:4–5: “One who rules his own house well, having his children in submission with all reverence (for if a man does not know how to rule his own house, how will he take care of the church of God?).”

This tells us that when a man knows how to rule his own house well, he will also have training in caring for the church.

Take the case of someone who is unmarried and has no house to rule, yet has spiritual children. If it becomes clear that he can rule the church of God, don’t you think he is at least as competent as a married man with children who has never had children in Christ? If he has nurtured spiritual children, he has thereby superseded the temporal requirement. Paul exhorted married people regarding the marriage relationship, even though he himself was unmarried. Paul had sons in the faith: Timothy, Titus, and of course, many more. As an apostle he traveled and oversaw the churches. If he could travel around as an unmarried man, exhorting and overseeing all the churches, then one can assume that if he had settled in one place, though he was unmarried, he could have managed the oversight of one church.

In this matter, the Son of Man is also Lord of the Sabbath.

“Even Levi, who receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham, so to speak, for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him.” Hebrews 7:9–10.

In the same way, Paul, by appointing overseers, became an overseer himself; because the one who appoints is clearly greater than the one who is appointed. Since an unmarried person can appoint one who is married, then a person’s value cannot be determined by whether or not he is married, but rather by the depth of his relationship with God. So then, if it is one’s relationship with God that counts, why let yourself be hindered by something that was meant to develop your abilities? For if a person becomes proficient, then the goal has been reached. Why let yourself be hindered by the means?

But it is true that an overseer ought to be a married man with believing children, because such a man is more tied to one place than, for example, you are to Kristiansand. You are thinking of moving; that is something you would probably not do if you were older and had grown-up children.

Nevertheless, if God lacks the one He will use another, without being bound by the “pattern” for an ideal overseer. It is this leading of God into which we need insight. Human beings are not at a total loss just because they don’t have the ideal material at hand. God is far less so.

There is an urgent need for messengers who are sent by the Holy Spirit and who can give guidance and direction within the churches. Exceedingly great authority is demanded of such men. They must have nerves of steel and a faith of iron so that they can subdue all folly. They need wisdom to resolve difficulties, love to suffer patiently, and many other qualities.

I hear that you and the others are studying and searching in the Word of God. There are depths there. God’s Spirit has been working with me for several years, night and day, giving constant revelation in the knowledge of God, and my hunger becomes more intense the more God gives me. It is said that love surpasses knowledge. This often gets distorted. The knowledge of God is not reduced to an inferior position by love; rather, the more knowledge of God we receive, the more we understand His love. And when our knowledge of God increases still more, we understand His love even better. No matter how great our knowledge of God becomes, love will always be greater. In this way, knowledge and love go hand in hand.

I have much to write about. I am compelled by an inner fullness, for God has done tremendous things, and the savor of His knowledge fills His elect with tremendous joy.

[The rest of the letter is missing.]





Horten, Christmas Day, 1908 — # 73


Dear Brother Aksel,

I have read and reread your very good letter several times very carefully and with great joy. I have also read all the Scripture references — not for the sake of searching the Scriptures, but in order to understand to the fullest what you wanted to say.

It is no easy matter to write as I did in my last letter to the person I least of all want to drive away. Therefore, I wrote two letters and tore them up before I felt I had found the right words, because I was keenly aware that there were things which threatened to disturb our fellowship in the Spirit. You hope that next time I will “dare” to expose the enemy right away, without any subtleties or long, indirect approaches, so that you can make quick work of him.

You are a dentist, so you have extracted many teeth. Once when you extracted one of my teeth, you first examined me with the help of a delicate steel instrument and a mirror to find out where the decayed tooth was situated in my mouth, what its condition was, etc. The last time, you even consulted with R. But now you advise me to take the forceps immediately and pull it out. Can this really be justified? Couldn’t one extract the wrong tooth, perhaps two? Your occupation is closer to that of a doctor than mine, so no doubt you understand what it means for a doctor to “make a diagnosis.” But now you are advising me to pronounce my “prognosis” (prediction) without any prior diagnosis.

I can say this much from personal experience, that in unknown waters every wise captain will sound the depths before he sails ahead with his costly vessel. Joshua sent spies into the land in order to gather information. When I spoke to you indirectly and worked my way in circles, steadily nearing the center, you should have realized that “now he is on unfamiliar ground; here he is sounding the depths,” etc.; for that was the case in this situation. If speaking indirectly can lead me closer to a direct result, then why not use all the ways and means of speaking that are at my disposal?

Separating the enemy from our consciousness and from our life is like shooting a bear that is wrestling with your best friend. You must find the right position and distance if you don’t want to shoot them both. Afterward, your friend might upbraid you for not firing the moment you saw the bear.

Just these few lines for your consideration. When you read this carefully and think it through, you will no doubt understand that it is not so much “against” the sinner that I am zealous, as “for” the sinner and the fear of the Lord. Proverbs 23:17.

Greet everyone at home and also the brothers and sisters. I have more to write, but I will stop here for now. Your devoted brother in Christ,

Johan





Horten, December 31, 1908 — # 74


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace!

Again I want to write you a few words about God’s goodness and power.

Lately here in Horten we have noticed that the Spirit works to accomplish different things in different meetings. Yesterday the Spirit moved powerfully to bring forth confession of sins, but unfortunately it did not prevail. Recently we could clearly see that the Spirit was working to give healing, and a sister was healed from a stomach ulcer. She had been vomiting blood and had difficulty walking; there was hardly any type of food that she could digest. Yesterday brother Berg and I went to visit her. She is quite healthy now and can eat sour, sweet, and salty foods. So we have learned that the workings differ, but the Spirit is the same. This sister has had quite a loose tongue, and God has clearly shown her through the brothers in a unique way that if she wants to preserve her health she has to use her body for the glory of God. You see, she had been healed from the same sickness before, but she became sick again. She once sought help from Pastor Bolzius in Sweden for her leg, which was severely infected, and she was healed. He also told her that if she wanted to preserve her health, she had to beware of sinning.

God can’t stand evil, and so He allows people to become sick. Read James 5:14–17. Verse 15 shows that sickness is often related to having committed sins. Read 1 Corinthians 11:29–33, as well. This sister was very upset when we told her she had to refrain from gossiping, etc., but now she has taken it all as from God.

You see that brother P. would like you to write to his wife, if you have an opportunity. I have written to him that she needs to repent of her vanity. If you write to sister P., it would be best if you kept as close as possible to Isaiah 3:16 and the verses following, because such people do what is written in verse 15. We must be faithful to speak the truth in love in every situation if we want to make progress.

Just these few lines, wishing you a blessed New Year.

Greet everyone at home and the brothers and sisters as well.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 10, 1909 — # 75


Dear Brother Aksel,

I hope you have received my letter dated the 8th of this month. Today I received a very good letter from Father. I’m also returning your letter from T. in which he invites you to be his intimate friend. With regard to this, I can only answer with Matthew 12:50: “For whoever does the will of My Father in heaven is My brother and sister and mother.” I presume that the expression “intimate friend” is covered by this verse. If T. wants to have a friend according to the flesh, he should be made aware that we no longer know any man according to the flesh. Really, a servant of the Lord should understand that. It is a great shame for a person to write such a thing. For my own part, I am extremely happy that I am even allowed to live, and that I haven’t been hanged — much less to have an “intimate friend” according to the flesh. Such nonsense shouldn’t be allowed to pass without a sound reprimand.

It is becoming clearer and clearer to me that the weaker sheep have not been adequately cared for in K. Therefore, the Lord will now come and judge between the fat and the lean sheep. Ezekiel 34:20. It is so easy to push with your side, shoulder, and horns and to knock the more feeble sheep aside so that they are driven out and scattered, verse 21. We are to give more honor to the weaker members. I know quite well that this has not been done intentionally. It is due to ignorance and lack of vigilance, and that is why one should judge these transgressions very severely.

Concerning the position of the overseer: he who seeks this position should have demonstrated by his own individual labor in the church that he is able to gather brothers and sisters around him. He must have won their complete confidence. Such a person must grow up on his own in a natural way. Don’t be too quick to arrange these things; the end result must be a spiritual church. Let judgment do its work, watch how the different individuals respond to the judgment, and then let life show which of the brothers is capable of such a task.

Father says that people hinder the use of the spiritual gifts. On this point we have to be very careful so that God’s kingdom can grow in every way. Dear brother, I have absolute confidence in you in Christ Jesus. You have a great task to carry out. Let everyone who should be honored be honored, and let everyone who should judge himself judge himself. Do nothing out of partiality; do everything before God’s face. Be like Moses who was faithful in all his house. Now is your hour. Carry out your task in the leading and power of the Spirit, and let situations come upon you and to you before you respond. Let things go as they did with Prime Minister Michelsen in 1905 when he said that the situation had changed more rapidly than anyone could have imagined and that this necessitated action.

One must be very cautious and sensitive when taking action in the church of the living God, but he who is found to be pure in his actions will be greatly blessed in his task. Therefore, let the whole situation take care of itself, and let time help in this process. May God bless the brothers and sisters in K. I have great confidence in their uprightness before God, but there are things that have defiled the church. God will now cleanse those things away by judgment. So don’t let anyone get discouraged, but with boldness go through the judgment into salvation and peace.

Hearty greetings. Write soon. Greet the brothers and sisters. Greet Father and everyone at home.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, February 8, 1909 — # 76


Dear Brother Aksel

Even though I understand that you have determined in your heart not to write to me, I want to write a few lines to you in the name and power of Christ. For if I make you sorrowful, who is he who makes me glad but the one who is made sorrowful by me? My motive wasn’t to make you sorrowful, and it is the motive which should be judged if the judgment is going to be righteous. At work we have a lawyer who is an expert in the administration of justice. He explained to us that motive and attitude of mind are key considerations when a criminal is to be tried. If it can be proven that the criminal did not consciously or willfully commit the crime, then he is found innocent. I’m not saying that I should be found innocent in this matter, but I would say that, just as I am well known to God, I trust that I am also well known in your conscience. It has always been a joy for me to hear from you, and it will continue to be a joy in the future. But that joy is not greater than the truth itself; so for the sake of the truth I have been willing to sacrifice it. Because the truth of Christ has become so precious to me, every brother and sister who is of the truth is also very precious. If my humility can promote fellowship in Christ Jesus, then I will joyfully humble myself, with all my heart, even in those areas where I have battled in the zeal of Christ for the furtherance of the truth.

Not that this will bring me honor from you, but from Him who discerns the motives even through judgment. So I hope that we will meet again in Christ Jesus — if not exactly at the point where we lost contact, at least somewhere within the promised land, toward which our faces must always be set if we are to come to Jerusalem.

We are having some difficulties here in Horten, too, but by the Spirit of judgement and burning everything will come into order. “A man who wanders from the way of understanding will rest in the assembly of the dead.” Proverbs 21:16. We might as well be reconciled to having battles in the congregation of the living, because without battles there can be no victory. God always teaches us something in battles. Naturally, it is very peaceful in the assembly of the dead.

I just wanted to send you these few words. Hearty greetings to you with 1 Corinthians 4:2 and, as a reminder, 1 Corinthians 1:26– 30. Greetings to Mother and Father and to the rest of the family. Your brother, always sharing in judgment and liberation, sorrow and joy,

Johan





Horten, March 18, 1909 — # 77


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for the time we had together and for your postcard. God is gracious and mighty. He clears a path where the way was previously impassable, and we can only stand still and marvel at His wonderful salvation. Total salvation is obtainable in Christ Jesus. The One who raised up Christ, in whom all salvation is obtainable, is God the Father. When God raised up the Son from the dead, He also raised us up. In other words, the Son was not resurrected alone; the church, which is His body, was raised together with Him. God raised us up with Him and made us sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus. Ephesians 2:6. Christ in you, the hope of glory. Our life is hidden with Christ in God. So we see that the resurrection of Christ has far-reaching significance.

The resurrection of Christ took place 1900 years ago. Since that time no new resurrection has occurred. From this we understand that we were already in Christ Jesus 1900 years ago, in the resurrection. But to go back even further, let us look at Ephesians 1:4–5: “Just as He chose us in Him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love, having predestined us to adoption as sons by Jesus Christ to Himself, according to the good pleasure of His will.” So when Jesus was resurrected, all those who were predestined were also resurrected with Him.

If we imagine ourselves being together with Him in the resurrection, we get but a small glimpse of “what is the exceeding greatness of His power toward us who believe, according to the working of His mighty power which He worked in Christ when He raised Him from the dead and seated Him at His right hand in the heavenly places.” But we must not see ourselves in Him only in the resurrection. We were also in Him while He walked here on earth. That is why He sanctified Himself for us, so that we should be holy in truth.

He was the true grain of wheat which had to fall into the ground and die in order to bear fruit. But just as the grains in the ear come forth from the grain of wheat that was put in the ground, in the same manner we also come forth from Christ. This grain of wheat takes centuries to bring its fruit to maturity, for He is the Savior of all people throughout all ages. Now we — like the first grain of wheat — are to put on love, the bond of perfection, so that the peace of Christ can rule in our hearts, to which we also were called in one body. Colossians 3:14–15.

I hope to come to Oslo at Easter, God willing.

Very best greetings from your brother in Christ Jesus,

Johan





Horten, March 28, 1909 — # 78


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you very much for your good letter which came today. I see in Byposten [a local newspaper] that you sent in one of my private letters. Well, there’s no harm in bringing forth the knowledge of God by any means available, so that God can be glorified in all things and in every way through us in Christ Jesus. I have written an article for Byposten about unclean spirits. We see in Matthew 8:31 that the evil spirits begged Jesus: “ ‘If you cast us out, permit us to go away into the herd of swine.’ And He said to them, ‘Go.’ ” On this occasion, Jesus spoke with the evil spirits and not with the men who were possessed. Those who were possessed had been overcome by these evil spirits. These spirits were even able to use their minds and their tongues. Acts 19 tells us about the sons of Sceva who tried to cast out evil spirits: “And the evil spirit answered and said, ‘Jesus I know, and Paul I know; but who are you?’ ” Again, we see that it was the evil spirit that spoke. About two years ago I visited a woman out in the country. This woman had begun behaving strangely as a result of pressure from her relatives who were after her money. She became so annoyed and upset about this that she felt as if something snapped inside, she said. From that moment on she said she could not be saved. I spoke with her privately and suggested that we pray. “Yes, you can certainly pray,” she said, “but you needn’t bother to pray for me, because I can’t be saved.” An older woman who also was present asked this old woman to repeat after her, word by word, while she prayed. “Of course I can repeat the words,” she said, “but it won’t do me any good.” My mother-in-law went out to visit her later. She was deeply grieved over the woman’s condition, and almost unconsciously, she put her hands on the woman’s head and commanded the evil spirit to depart in the name of Jesus. The old woman looked at her in amazement and was healed from that very moment. About a month later she died, believing in her Savior. You can see from this that I had not spoken with the old woman, but rather with the evil spirit that possessed her. It is extremely important for us to realize that we can meet people with whose spirit we speak and not the people themselves. Aren’t mental hospitals full of people like that? I thought it might be good to use Byposten to spread some knowledge about this subject; that’s why I sent in this article. In the name of Jesus we could then cast out the evil spirits and thus help these poor people.

When a person says that he cannot be saved, this in itself is a clear indication that an evil spirit is speaking. People often become possessed if they brood over something to the point of obsession. They take leave of their senses — something snaps. Then they are completely conquered. After that we will be dealing with the spirit that has conquered them, and not the people themselves.

There is a difference between the evil spirit and the person in whom the evil spirit dwells.

May God awaken His people so that such poor souls can be helped, because there are certainly more of them than we realize. But they are considered mentally ill, of course.

Peter was not possessed, but he allowed himself to be deceived by Satan to such an extent that Jesus had to say: “Get behind Me, Satan!” For it was Satan who spoke through Peter to get Jesus to spare Himself. Therefore it is important even among believers to test everything that is said.

Please greet the family when you get home. Hearty greetings from your brother and co-worker in the Lord,

Johan





Horten, April 15, 1909 — # 79


Dear Brother Aksel

Hearty thanks for the time we had together in Oslo.

I have written a comforting letter to brother W; I understand they are in a real battle. In the letter, I showed by the Scriptures that it is the Spirit we need and not just the letter. I have also written an article for Misjonæren regarding the pernicious doctrine that teaches people to hop from Romans 6 into Romans 8. You see, in Moss I met a brother in a restaurant who had “hopped” into Romans 8, but another brother there listened intently to my explanation of this. He questioned many things I said and at times disagreed, but in the end he said he was in complete agreement and that he rejoiced to hear it explained in that way.

I don’t know what my next step will be. All avenues seem closed. There are only two Christian papers that might provide an outlet. God is the one who closes, and God is the one who opens; we can do nothing about that.

We live in remarkable times. God grant us to be watchful in all things.

Greet the brothers and sisters, and the best to you from your brother in Christ Jesus,

Johan





Horten, April 20, 1909 — # 80


Dear Brother Aksel

God is good!

Thank you for your good letters in which I see that brother X from Bergen intends to make a trip to Horten. My work has not been so much to communicate outwardly — to people — but rather to maintain an inner communication with God. Therefore I know little about diplomatic negotiations, which are, no doubt, essential in getting things done. But, like everything else, they stand or fall depending upon what one can draw from the divine fountains. Since the one — for the sake of love — cannot get along without the other, we have to make ourselves available, not so much because of the help we can give, but to make God’s people understand more readily that as members of the body we are different, and that all members do not have the same ministry. So, in light of that, brother X is heartily welcome, for he also welcomed me when I was in Bergen.

You mentioned the publication. It should be born in rest and come forth from need, for it is God who supplies all our need in Jesus Christ. Everything in the paper must lead directly to godliness. We have enough “story-telling” papers. We need a “working” paper, full of Spirit and life. If, by the grace of God, we could initiate that sort of a publication, it would set the tone for spiritual life in this country — nothing less; and it would spread on its own because of its content. A publication that can give teaching and instruction is sorely needed in our country. The need is there already, but this need is being concentrated in us as a burden. And once we have received it as a burden, then the burden itself will provide the power by which the Spirit of God leads the work to completion. We know that God will supply all our need in Christ Jesus, and I have almost come to the point where I see no way for my need to be met except by means of a publication. God has given me a strong desire to spread these teachings which He Himself has taught me. My need demands an outlet, something that God, according to His Word, will provide in order to supply “all need.”

I am not making much of an effort to explain myself. I am writing my thoughts just as they come, since you understand what I mean.

Brotherly greetings,

Johan





Horten, April 29, 1909 — # 81


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

Thank you for your very good letter. I see that you are doing well and that you wish you could live alone in quietness. Yes, that is the best thing in this world. Live happily in the presence of God alone in rest and confidence. Stand before God’s face and listen to His voice — can there be anything greater than that? Can you find any deeper rest here on earth? We need not be anxious about our works; it is not their quantity but their quality that is so important. God longs for people who will live before His face. There are already plenty of those who live before people. And when we seek God’s honor in all things, He will not allow us to be put to shame. So I was happy that you wrote about living in quietness. There are, however, two kinds of quietness: the quietness of death, and the quietness of those who are listening. Let us choose the latter with all vigilance.

Brother Andresen (“the happy bricklayer”) was here for a few days, and I cannot speak highly enough about that man. He prayed night and day and was a great blessing. He laid his hands on my son who was sick, and he was healed immediately. Brother Andresen is now in Larvik and Kongsberg. I believe he will be a great blessing in Kristiansand, because he teaches people to pray.

You mentioned the article in Misjonæren. It was a joy to hear that some people have awakened and started to think. Naturally, a little article like that cannot cover everything. Its limitations will be easily discerned, and that will give our opposers opportunity to take up issues which are not even mentioned in the article. We understand in part, and we speak in part. However, I have placed the whole matter in God’s hands, because it is not myself I am interested in defending. It is for the sake of the truth as the truth that I, according to the grace God gives, have labored to counter that totally false teaching which has permeated almost all the children of God who consider themselves freed from the law. Quite a number have ended up in a false freedom and thereby fallen into all kinds of sins. That’s why it is absolutely vital that this issue is addressed. Many brothers and sisters received the Spirit during the recent revival, and it would be tragic if they all fell prey to these wretched doctrines. People embrace such teaching because they are afraid of coming into bondage. But one of the attributes of the truth is that it makes one free, so no one needs to be afraid to acknowledge it.

Brotherly greetings.

Yours in Christ,

Johan





Horten, May 14, 1909 — # 82


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

Thank you for your good letter. I have a lot to do. Everything requires work. Brother Ellefsen is now at sea on the Norge. He says everything is going very well on board. Brother Aslaksen (the cadet) has just taken his final examination and finished first in his class, far ahead of number two. The head of the Naval Academy, Commander Dawes, congratulated him. It gets better and better each time we talk together. Brother Aslaksen is a determined person. He has a good understanding of many things, and the understanding he has is pure. It’s easy for him to discern different spirits. It’s a pleasure to hear how well he can do this.

Extraordinarily enough, no one in Misjonæren has answered or written anything about Romans 7 and 8. My heart rejoices in quietness. It is refreshing manna for the soul. All striving is vanity; it’s like chasing after the wind. But communion with the Lord puts strength in the bones and gives satisfaction in the deepest recesses of the heart. To lie on the Lord’s breast refreshes and restores body, soul, and spirit.

Our bodies eventually grow old and break down. This is evidence enough that the law of sin and death is at work in the body. This is easy to see. Our bodies are not freed from the law of sin and death, but our minds are. It’s amazing that this should be so difficult to understand.

I recently received a letter from Father. He was really downcast. It seemed to him like everyone was seeking his own. Today I received another letter, and he is now very bold and happy. We have no right to be depressed when people seek their own. Let us simply endeavor to draw people to Christ.

Hearty greetings in Jesus Christ.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, August 13, 1909 — # 83


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

Thank you so much for your good letter.

We have just had a visit from brother X from Copenhagen. He stayed from Thursday to Sunday morning; then he went to Oslo. He is a very dear brother. He said himself that he had had a tendency to be very critical. We came to the conclusion that a person who can correct the faults he sees, in a fatherly way, in all love, is greater than one who criticizes. We agreed on that. How I wish that everyone who had received grace from God to separate the precious from the vile would use this ability to help God’s people, instead of using it to criticize and drive them even further away. We have enough taskmasters, but there is a great lack of fathers in Christ Jesus. May we remember this!!! It takes a mature mind to overlook offenses, insignificant mistakes, and other such things by which God’s people can be taken captive. Turning two or three notches of the helm can change the ship’s course, but a lot of criticism about the course doesn’t help at all.

It is very clear to me that we are most at rest when our thoughts and our minds are deep in God. It is not some sort of intellectual theology we are developing; it is only what is revealed to us in the Holy Spirit. Of course, our thoughts must be somewhere, and we find no rest in the flesh; you know that very well. But my impression is that brother X doesn’t like this strong meat, and so he suggests rest. But the rest he is suggesting (a vacation rest) belongs more to the realm of the flesh than to the realm of the Spirit. May God give you grace not to give rest to those you come into contact with before they have found true rest. We have no time at all for vacation rest. Sister P. also wanted rest, but she found none until she rested in God’s glorious truths.

The wisdom that is from above is first pure, then peaceable. It is not first peaceable and then pure. People want a peaceful life just as they are, but the wisdom which is from above demands purity first.

Most hearty greetings to you from your brother battling in Christ,

Johan





Horten, August 23, 1909 — # 84


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

Thank you for your postcard from Lyngør. Yesterday brother X was here. We spoke about many things, and in particular he asked many questions about Romans 7. Among other things, he asked how Paul could say that the commandment brought death to him and later say that it wasn’t the commandment that brought death to him, but sin. This may seem somewhat confusing, but I believe he was more or less satisfied with the answer.

I explained that the commandment, sin, and I were three different things. When sin and I were united, the commandment worked until I felt and understood that I was laboring under a burden (sin) that could never satisfy the requirement of the law. In the meantime, the commandment worked on me so that I became aware of all kinds of lusts. The commandment enabled me to see all my wretchedness, with the consequence that I capitulated. The commandment was meant to bring life, but I found it to bring death. Then, just when I died, I became alive and came into harmony with the commandment. So we see that the commandment brought life to me — real life — but that is a life that comes after death (self-surrender). All this happened on account of sin, that it might be manifest as sin. So sin was producing death in him through what is good — namely, the commandment. And that in turn means: before, I was united with sin; but now, I am united with the commandment.

The next thing brother X couldn’t comprehend was verse 20: “Now if I do what I will not to do, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.” However, he came to full clarity about this and was delighted over it. He has a sharp mind, but as you know, it is possible to have a sharp mind and yet be slow to comprehend. I am not applying this to brother X; I just mention it as something to reflect on in this context.

We got along very well together. He wasn’t afraid of being exposed in some way. He came at 11:30 a.m. and left at about 6:30 p.m. Interestingly enough, he said that he didn’t understand what I wrote. He also said that the last letter I wrote about “the body of Christ” (the church) and “the man” had not been understood. That very letter contained many precious truths, but he said that it was extremely concentrated with many thoughts on top of each other.

I do not believe that we can speak about these deeper things to people in general; all we can do is help them to advance from where they are. I also said to brother X that not all God’s people are disciples of Jesus, only those who take up their cross. He agreed with this, and now he is determined to take up his cross. He had great confidence in you, and always felt judged when he was together with you. This was not so pleasant, but necessary, he said.

Just this little “report” about our time together. Greet everyone at home. I hope we can get together when this west coast trip has ended. It is always so good to speak with you about the mysteries of Christ. Brother X is good material if only he can endure the cross.

Hearty greetings from everyone here.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, August 30, 1909 — # 85


Dear Brother Aksel,

I just received your good letter. You wrote a little about F., saying that he believes he no longer has a body of sin, etc. I think that since you have tried again and again to convince him of what is right, you should now let him be. Otherwise, this perpetual struggle will wear you out physically without producing any substantial fruit. I have reminded F. about these things time and time again, but he will not listen. Most likely there is something in his life which he is not willing to bring into the light, and he is trying to use darkness and distortion to get around it. We are free of responsibility in this. We have reminded him countless times that it is through many tribulations that we enter into the kingdom of God, and that we must go the way of the cross.

Dear brother, it is a tremendous joy for me to see your zeal for God and your love of the truth — even when it brings you suffering. Continue faithfully with what you have, both in your personal life and in your ministry, and God will grant you an abundant entrance into His eternal kingdom.

I have had watch duty, so I’ve had time to read several of the English books you gave me. Mrs. Penn-Lewis’ Hints for Workers is truly excellent. I have also read in Die Heiligung [a German language Christian periodical].

When you encounter people who are slow to understand, it is a strain physically, because you are constantly searching for ways to convince them. But a quiet, peaceful conversation with people who are like-minded gives strength to body, soul, and spirit. Since you have a weak body, I believe you should be particularly watchful on this point, so that you do not needlessly overexert yourself. As you know, it was not just in Paul’s time that one could encounter people who strongly opposed the truth. There are a lot of people today, too, who are just like Alexander the coppersmith. I don’t see any point in wasting our energy on people like that, unless it would be just for the satisfaction of having thoroughly exposed their folly. Nothing is so emotionally draining as a fruitless struggle to convince people. We can just let stubborn and obstinate people like that keep right on sailing without any goal or purpose. Jesus didn’t waste His time and energy on such people. He answered the fool according to his folly and let him sail on. We need to exercise ourselves in this type of spiritual “hard-handedness”.

Mrs. L. is here in Horten; she has visited me once. She also came to one meeting. She carried on in a very manly and “preachy” manner, both here with me and in the beginning of the meeting. She needs to be instructed about the meek, gentle discretion which adorns a spiritual woman. She also needs to have her vision turned away from the gifts, onto the Giver. But that’s a job for F., because she has most confidence in him. If these things aren’t corrected quickly, high-mindedness will destroy her, and she will end up out in the world again. He who considers himself a shepherd has quite a task with her. It is not surprising that Miss H. has some authority now. She got it because the others have been so good-natured and gullible. It just goes to show you how vital it is to keep out everything that is unwholesome right from the beginning.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, September 29, 1909 — # 86


Dear Brother Aksel,

Grace and peace from Jesus Christ our Lord!

Thank you for your good letter which I received today. It is always a joy to receive your letters, because you are always endeavoring to draw nearer and nearer to God in acknowledgment and in life.

On Sunday I was at brother Ellefsen’s; he was on shore leave. He had a fairly young seaman with him who had given his heart to God on board. Brother Ellefsen is more zealous than ever. Life on board and opposition have only brought him closer to Christ.

Brother B., who is on the other warship Tordenskiold, told about a young apprentice machinist who got saved on board the ship. His father and mother and all of his nine brothers and sisters were already saved. He was the only member of his family that wasn’t. When he told his family that he had given his heart to Jesus, the joy in his house was tremendous. They didn’t dare tell their elderly mother, because they were afraid it would be too much of a shock for her. Yesterday brother B. stood here with tears in his eyes and said that he longed to talk with me about many things.

It is amazing how God works — more amazing than I can express. His goodness is revealed more and more, and that has caused me to think much about Ephesians 2:7 recently: “That in the ages to come He might show forth the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus.”

During a conversation with X, God shed glorious light on 2 Peter 1 for us, starting from verse 19. There we saw clearly that the Scriptures (the prophetic word) are never written by the will of man, so they cannot be interpreted by the will of man, but only by and in the Holy Spirit.

You have a longing to go the way of faith. God will satisfy that longing according to His riches; for He has a great wealth of situations into which He can place us in order to try our faith. When our faith has been tried, it becomes more precious than perishable gold, which is also tried by fire. With God the Lord there is a way of escape from fire, water, and the grave — into a glory which is eternal and weighty. So God is able to find a way of escape in this situation, too. Our strength will be in quietness and in confidence.

We are to stand still and see the salvation of the Lord. You will remember that we have spoken much together about these things.

Thank you for the greeting. It was so appropriate, and it was a blessing to me. God has broken gates of bronze and cut the bars of iron in two, and He will continue to do this.

It is only our labor in the Lord which bears eternal fruit. Only gold, silver, and precious stones will be able to endure the fire when that day comes. Let us remember this and remind others of it, so that more and more we can become God’s co-workers and say with Paul: “For we are God’s fellow workers, you are God’s field.” God is a spirit, and His work is spiritual. Therefore, if we are going to be His fellow workers, we must be able to do a work in the Spirit. To be God’s field is one thing, but to be a worker in His field is something else entirely.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, October 13, 1909 — # 87


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter and for the telegram. Today, at the same time your letter came, I also received a long letter from brother X. You should plan your trip so that you arrive here on Saturday, because we have a lot to talk about. I have heard that brother X is experiencing great battles, but he will simply have to suffer through them. You should write to him now and then and give him some strong exhortations. I wrote to him today that we have enough spiritual wrecks already (i.e., people who have not fought their way through to full victory), and that the editor of a large paper should be a man with full victory. It was a delight to hear that they are going to meet together to take up the issue of sanctification. As you know, there has been a private meeting on sanctification at N.’s in Copenhagen, to which brothers P. and R. were invited. I have written to brother R. and asked him to tell me a little about how this meeting turned out, which subjects were discussed, and what conclusions were reached.

What is needed now in our country and in all of Scandinavia is an effective work directed toward sanctification. We have had enough conferences and conventions. If we are going to have more of that kind of thing, it would have to be a conference on sanctification where we discussed the importance of spreading an understanding of what needs to happen after one has received the power of the resurrection — namely, fellowship with Christ in His sufferings. We also need a paper about sanctification. Several of the Christian papers now being published will probably not last very long, because they are striving to gather to themselves and are not providing a healthy spiritual direction.

If brothers E. and B. don’t follow along in this development into deeper sanctification, they will end up taking a passive or perhaps even an opposing role, which will quickly bring them up to the surface. An article I wrote to Misjonæren will probably appear in the paper this Friday. This article is more radical than any of the other articles I have dared to write before on this subject. I allowed these things to pass my scrutiny because I have a feeling that the editor is more in agreement with me now. You know yourself that one must write in such a way that one can get into the paper, even if this means holding back the most pointed and bold assertions.

The men who have brought the doctrine into this country about hopping over to Romans 8 are gravely lacking in integrity. This is the very thing I have been wanting to bring into the light, since they do not defend their doctrine; they just allow it to be torn down without any resistance. But allowing it to fall without resistance is the same as letting go of the rudder. The spiritual leadership will slip out of their hands because they are not able to keep the ship on the right course. Have you actually thought about this? This is and will be the end of this spiritual campaign, for it is always the victorious who rule, both in the temporal and the spiritual. But I don’t think they understand the time of their visitation. The time came for Nebuchadnezzar when the kingdom was torn from his hand. We are living in a time of powerful spiritual change. For this reason there is an urgent need for us to watch and pray. It is good for us to discuss these matters, since God has given you grace to labor much, both in writing and speaking, against the workers who have sought to hold the rudder even though they don’t know how to steer. I have experienced the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings more strongly in recent days than I have for a long time. This has compelled me to pray more in order to find comfort. I hope to see you soon and to speak more, face to face.

Your brother, sharing in the work,

Johan





Horten, October 23, 1909 — # 88


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for your letters. I’ve read through the manuscript and have no comment except that I wish these truths could be spread far and wide. It will have a good effect in Byposten. I’ve been reading aloud for Pauline in the evenings from The Autobiography of Madame Guyon. Both of us find it very valuable reading for the believer who is growing spiritually. She writes, among other things: “In our early Christian life we are more prone to rejoice over our joy than to rejoice over God Himself.” I’ve finished about 110 of the approximately 500 pages in the book. I read the letter from F; it looks like he is rejoicing greatly over the fact that he is glad. This source of joy must be uprooted, and that will bring a reaction. Pull down these ideas of his about how we inhale God’s Spirit, etc. The air we breathe consists of oxygen, carbon dioxide, nitrogen, etc. It can be broken down chemically into its individual components. It is a part of the natural creation; it is in no way the Lord of creation. You should thoroughly analyze the air for him and make it as down-to-earth as you possibly can. If each time F. takes a breath, he rejoices over the feeling he experiences, then he is rejoicing over his joy, as mentioned above. That has nothing to do with God Himself.

Madame Guyon writes that the work that goes on within the soul and the work that goes on outwardly must go hand in hand. That is a great truth. We must be on guard against forcing outward works to such a degree that the work within is neglected. If we do that, the spiritual content of our works will remain the same and we will only be able to repeat again and again what we have already learned. There may be nothing wrong with these works, but we must not neglect ourselves, so that the first become more than the last.

I was just down talking with brother A. We talked so long that the Bastø left without him, and his suitcase as still on board. He had to send a telegram to Fredrikstad. Afterwards he came home and ate with us and then left at 8:00 p.m.

Brother A. certainly has his battles, although he says he is doing all right now. However, I had the distinct feeling that he had no understanding whatsoever and was not involved in the slightest in the spiritual conflicts which are now going on. He seemed oblivious to it all. It is just amazing how hidden this is. It is so hidden that one can feel sick from having to bear it alone.

God has led us into a sphere where we can’t find many people with whom we can share our heart. This becomes more and more amazing to me, but it is the Lord who has done it.

Brother A. said he was somewhat skeptical about Madame Guyon. He felt she forced things too much, and he didn’t think it was very good for a person to read too much of her writings. I said that we have to take the kingdom of heaven by force. He fears that you think and work too much, and that you will burn out your life’s light too quickly through so much forced spiritual labor.

Be that as it may, I know that it does me no harm whatsoever to devote myself too much to God. His law is my delight, and I know that it is also your delight. But if you work so much that it wears down your body and damages your health, then you should be more careful to practice moderation. You know yourself best. I know one thing for sure: rest in God strengthens us both physically and spiritually, because rest and peace of mind affect our entire being.

I had very little to say to brother A. this evening. I just couldn’t seem to find anything to say. Madame Guyon writes about a time when two women visited her. They began to discuss the Scriptures, but Madame Guyon sat quietly and couldn’t say anything. She was completely taken up with the working of the Spirit within. A few days later one of the women came to her in need and explained to her that she wanted to be saved. Madame Guyon asked her if the other woman had persuaded her to seek God. “No, it was your silence which brought me into this need,” she said. Madame Guyon was amazed.

We can learn from this that when the Spirit prompts us to be quiet, there is a purpose in it. There is one silence that comes from a lack of knowledge, and there is another silence that comes from spiritual devotion. It is the latter silence that is so effective.

Granted, some of her ideas are strongly influenced by the Catholic church, but God has given us light so we are able to separate the wheat from the chaff. Personally, I firmly believe that it is very healthy and edifying to read about godfearing souls and the battles and hardships they had to endure in order to gain light. We need to keep one thing in mind though, and that is that we don’t constantly quote, for example, Madame Guyon. God has led us to the place where we can rejoice in reading about others who have had the same experiences that we have, but not everyone understands that.

Regarding the spiritual battles that are going on now, we need to allow God to lead us, regardless of whether or not the others understand it. I am convinced that this will have its effect on one here and one there without them even being aware of it.

To me, life in God becomes more precious every day, and it is just amazing to me that not everyone is willing to go this glorious, open way of sanctification. Madame Guyon’s book has truly been a blessing for me, because I detect a zeal in her which blesses my heart. Not many people in each century give themselves over so unreservedly to God. I also see that she had to go through many of the same battles I have had to go through.

Peter was a man who understood what was going on. That’s why in his time he could say: “Yes, I think it is right, as long as I am in this tent, to stir you up by reminding you.” Imagine! Stir them up by reminding them. That is a far cry from drawing people away from Christ. The same apostle writes later: “Grow in the grace and knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.”

When all is said and done, I believe this formula is the one we should follow.

For contemplation: Proverbs 21:16. For comfort: Proverbs 22:4.

Greetings with Proverbs 4, from verse 20; especially notice verse 22. This verse indicates that the effect of taking God’s Word to heart is something quite different from breaking down our body.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, November 1, 1909 — # 89


Dear Brother Aksel

Grace and peace!

Thank you for your two letters which came today. I just wrote to brother X about my article, telling him to act according to God’s will in this matter as well. I said that whether he burned my article, set it aside, or used it, the love of Christ would not allow us to be separated because of it. Then I told him that he should lay his publication on the altar and let the fire of the Lord consume it. He could then receive it back in a renewed form as a paper that would command respect. You see, he told me that the paper was his livelihood.

Yesterday evening I was at a meeting at X’s home where brother Berg and several other brothers and sisters were gathered. I handed out Father’s song book and, after a good meeting, I told them that God had given you and me an amazing revelation about the Bridegroom and bride. There was complete silence as I explained about it, and imagine this: it went right into their hearts, and everyone there rejoiced with a holy joy! Today I talked to three of those who were present at the meeting, and they were exceedingly joyful. Brother Berg accepted this revelation with joy, saying that it was just what he needed right now. I spoke about sanctification, and the interest was so great that during the prayer meeting almost everybody prayed about it.

Remarkable to read the letter from brother Å. He has truly laid hold of the fellowship of the sufferings of Christ. Just wait and see: Father will go the same way!

A movement of sanctification is now brewing on a far larger scale than we can imagine. It is amazing to see how steadily and well it is progressing. Here in Horten people have been filled with a deep longing for holiness. May God create His image in us and in His people!

I am enclosing the letter from X regarding the article about “the movement,” so that you can see he is indeed fearful for his paper. I suggested that he not print the article, because his faith and his deeds should be in harmony, and also because he should not do works that go beyond the limits of his capacity.

I fully agree with you that we should tear down the wall, but you know that an explosive is just as unsuited for digging as a shovel is for blasting. However, since both are very necessary and have a positive effect on the wall, may the will of the Lord be done — whether by shovel or by explosive.

A hearty greeting to you up there in the Lord’s study-room. I can tell from your letters that you are raw material for instruction.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 2, 1909 — # 90


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

I have just received a letter from brother X in which he says that his paper is several thousand kroner in debt, and for this reason he is not free. He feels obligated to edit his paper in such a way that he doesn’t lose money on it. My article will therefore receive an honorable place on the shelf, he said. Yes, a lot could be said about this, which is why one should not say anything.

The work of preparing the ground, which is absolutely necessary for true sanctification, has thus been brought to a halt because of the above-mentioned money matter. My ministry in Christ has always been directed toward first clearing the ground entirely and then building up. Building on someone else’s foundation has always been as loathsome to me as … really, I hardly know what expression to give it; to me it is simply spiritual adultery. For this reason, all those who have worked to break down have appeared to be hard and callous. But those people who out of love for the truth have allowed themselves to be broken down have certainly experienced later that my work in Christ has not only been to break down, but also to build up. Unfortunately, there are not many who have been able to persevere in this, but those who have can bear witness to the blessed fellowship we share in the Holy Spirit.

God has dealt very severely with me right from the beginning, almost more than I thought a human being could bear. He allowed me to go through fiery trials, which I kept between God and myself. Because of being so severely dealt with and so thoroughly uprooted, I came at an early stage into deep fellowship with Christ in His sufferings. All of the hardest trials were voluntary. I could easily have cast everything overboard and avoided the sufferings, but I always had the feeling that if I did, my relationship with God would never be the same; I would lose both His power and His intimate fellowship. As a result, I received grace from God to go through all these hardships victoriously — through tremendous sufferings.

Because I myself have had to go this way, it is precisely here that a work has taken place in my inner being — an education, a spiritual education which only God can give. For this very reason, everything I write is so “hard,” what I speak is so “hard,” and my field of work becomes smaller and smaller. When I wrote to this paper, I tried with all my might to restrain myself. So the article they received was quite moderate, but that was not without a great deal of effort on my part to restrain myself. I have had to practice moderation for the sake of others.

This very article, which ended up on the shelf, was the fruit of a long-term ground clearing work. It had come to the point that the crowbar was applied to particularly important matters where clearing was vital in order for the work of sanctification to proceed. God has been in it the whole time, and I am certain that He would have given glorious victory even if the enemies of the cross of Christ had raged in indignation. Without my giving particular attention to it, the spiritual work in this paper has been guided purposefully in a definite direction toward a definite goal. Still, each time I am stopped, I realize that my hands are tied; and for this reason I am quite content also in this case.

God has given us a glorious work to perform, and I hold it in high esteem. Souls are needed in many places so that the lump can be leavened from many directions. It will succeed, that is certain. If people only loved the truth, it would go quickly.

There is already a little flock on the way of sanctification. Later we could possibly have a small “sanctification conference” and publish a little paper: Sanctification. This should be the firstfruits — the life-blood — of “the movement.”

We need a paper that’s free from everything and everyone, a paper that can raze to the ground and build up, an unbiased paper that won’t take any position that doesn’t have divine origins. People want to build and build, but every man needs to take careful heed what foundation he is building upon. “As a wise master builder I have laid the foundation,” Paul says, “and another builds on it. But let each one take heed how he builds on it.” If we seek to please people, we are not the servants of Christ. Men-pleasers spare themselves the pain of clearing the ground. But thanks be to God, no one can build upon another foundation than that which is laid, which is Christ. If anyone has another foundation, he will not succeed in building on it. That is why it is so absolutely vital to lay the true foundation first.

With that, my warmest regards. This time I have written in a more personal manner, because it seems to be appropriate just now.

Your brother, always bound in the truth which is in Christ,

Johan





Horten, November 8, 1909 — # 91


Dear Brother Aksel

I have just come from the office, and even though we have spoken so much together recently, I felt I had to write to you again. I really appreciated the time we had together yesterday and earlier today. Regarding Madame Guyon, we are certainly in agreement that she was a holy woman who received grace from God to express a great many truths. Nevertheless, in order to maintain your individuality, I believe you ought to read Madame Guyon with a critical eye, so that you always remain the central figure who tries all things and judges all things. We are individual members of the body. Each member has its allotted ministry, and it isn’t sure that our ministry is the same as Madame Guyon’s. But now it is our ministry which is to be perfected, and this must not be hindered by our being too preoccupied with another’s ministry. There is a tendency in us to surrender ourselves blindly to a person in whom we have confidence. Herein lies a very great danger; we risk losing our individuality by letting the one we admire become the dominant figure. We thereby demean ourselves to such a degree that ultimately we become little more than a shadow, or a parasite, with the result that we will miss God’s will for our own lives. God wants each living stone to be unique. This can be seen in Revelation 21:19, where the foundation of the city is made up of twelve different types of stones. Even though we are fully aware of this danger, that should not hinder us from reading what can benefit us and help our development, of course. Still, I believe that to abandon oneself heart and mind without the above-mentioned understanding, is unhealthy, and it can deprive us of our innate characteristics and uniqueness.

Christ suffered patiently for the joy that awaited Him. The greater He esteemed the goal, the more He could suffer. Therefore, let us see to it that we do not reduce the glory we have awaiting us to nothing. Otherwise we may come to experience the truth of the apostle’s words: “If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men the most pitiable.” As the Scriptures state: “Eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor have entered into the heart of man the things which God has prepared for those who love Him.” This hope gives us courage. He who has this hope purifies himself even as He is pure. Such a hope — a good hope — enables us to purify ourselves.

When Paul said that he could wish that he were accursed from Christ for the sake of his brethren — his kinsmen according to the flesh — he was expressing a tremendous goal, namely: winning all his brethren according to the flesh. He gave this testimony in the Holy Spirit — in the same Spirit that Christ had, He who became a curse for us. Tremendous goals lie behind these curses, and without them one would not be able to endure.

It is always so blessed to speak with you, dear brother. There is no one else I can speak to about the things of God and be so confident of being understood — no one I can speak to as an equal.

I was almost expecting you to be worried about X, that I would be too hard on him. Therefore, I let you know everything from the beginning, so you could get a clear picture of the situation before you expressed yourself. You grew at least a foot in my esteem when you concluded that probing deeply — right to the root of the matter — was precisely right and fully justified when he gave occasion for it like he did.

My task has not exactly been to praise people (except in cases where praise is as necessary as breaking down). I firmly believe that you will take it in the right way.

Brotherly greetings in the Lord.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, November 22, 1909 — # 92


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your letter and postcard, and for the papers you sent. Yesterday we had a blessed meeting. Brother Berg and the others are wholeheartedly along in the work of sanctification. I believe this work is going to spread, bringing great blessings where it comes. X seems to have had second thoughts, and not a moment too soon. By this time he should have been a teacher in Christ, but he still only understands the elementary principles. How tragic that a person in foolishness and cowardly fear of the sufferings of Christ should squander precious days and years so that even in his old age he can’t grasp the simplest truths.

X once said to Mrs. R. that he couldn’t deny that we spoke the truth. Think that he understood what the truth is, and yet in order to be on good terms with R. and his wife, he rejected it to preserve a carnal peace! One can’t exactly call that love for the truth! This is precisely what has kept him in bondage for so long. Love of the truth casts out all fear, and we gladly give up friendships, family ties, and everything else for the sake of love. Our heart and mind must bear all things for love of the truth; otherwise we are not fit for the kingdom of heaven.

When it comes right down to it, love for the truth is what gives us the ability and the drive to overcome all obstacles. It makes us as hard as steel; we become unshakable. It makes us loving toward all who are of the truth, even if they are on the edge of an abyss, provided they acknowledge their condition — acknowledge and reconcile themselves to the truth of their own utter depravity.

How base and cowardly it is to deny the truth because of the fear of man! Is it any wonder that people like this are left behind in the race? What is human friendship, anyway? Is it worth denying Christ for the sake of human friendship? I have not written home for a long time now. To send a bundle of good feelings is revolting to me. I don’t know what more to say, for I believe I’ve said enough. My conscience is free from their blood, which they have told me again and again that I am to be free from. There is no respect of persons with God. His soul has no pleasure in the one who draws back, no matter who he is.

As time goes on, I see more and more clearly that we are not to force the truth on people, for God’s Spirit does not do that. This, in turn, makes me content within that small circle of people who really love the truth. If you can win one person who knows what he wants, that is better than winning a hundred who do not know what they want. One Paul has done more in the kingdom of God than all the enemies of the cross of Christ combined.

As you can see, X writes something about taking up the cross; but one must be careful about praising him for it, since praise of this kind would only push him up to the surface again, where he is used to being. No, something more is called for than an afternoon’s passing regret about something or other that didn’t go according to plan. We can’t call that the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings. We could rather call it a plucking up by the roots of those plants which our heavenly Father has not planted. Perhaps not even that. It may be that this is nothing more than sorrow over the fact that an evil tree can’t bear good fruit.

And so, a warm greeting in Christ Jesus.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 23, 1909 — # 93


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for your good letter which I received today.

Your letter to X was even more full of excellent material than usual. God has given you grace to spin a web around X like the spider does with its prey. I believe it will be difficult for him to get out of it if you continue doing that a while longer until he comes to the acknowledgment that he is content to be in the net; then you can give him support — not before.

As you surely can sense, one has to be as wise as a serpent and as harmless as a dove. If one heeds the Spirit in all things, everything will work out quite naturally.

My heart was in total agreement with what you said about L. and the things that need to be sacrificed. Everything has to be sacrificed if we want to have peace. All carnal tears could be spared if, once and for all, we let go of the sacrifice and let it lie there. When God gives me grace to write to Father, I will ask him to save the letters you have sent him during these days, because I believe they can benefit many. I hear brother Y is tired both in body and soul. I believe he will have to offer a very great sacrifice if he wants to be wholly along. If he doesn’t give up everything, I believe it will go with him as it did with the rich young ruler.

I was just over at Z’s house and read her your letter to Father. She began to weep, because just today she had gone through the battle that was described in the letter — the battle to leave the sacrifice on the altar once it has been placed there.

Afterwards we read about the river in Ezekiel 47, how it brought life wherever it flowed, and how the trees bore fruit that would not fail, verse 12, but the river’s swamps and marshes would not be healed, they would be given over to salt, verse 11. If a person stagnates and will not obey the Spirit of God, he becomes like these swamps and marshes which are given over to salt, and life and vegetation can’t grow along the salty banks. The salt preserves the water in the marsh from decay, but at the same time allows nothing to grow in the vicinity. One spreads salt on garden paths to kill the grass. In this manner, I believe a soul can be preserved from decay by the power of the salt even if he is stagnant, but he is no longer fruitful. The soul, by the preserving power of the salt, can be saved on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ. We never salt anything that is living, only that which is dead. I’ve never heard of running salt water, but the river was running. The river must definitely be the Spirit of God; but since there was no salt in the river, the salt isn’t in the Spirit. But where is it then? The Lord is the Spirit, and the Spirit only testifies about the sacrifice — not about the salt on the sacrifice. The sacrifice is Jesus, and the Spirit testifies about Him. The salt with which the sacrifice is salted is outside the sacrifice. What is the salt then? My understanding has reached its limit here; I find no way out. Wait, I think perhaps light is beginning to dawn. The salt preserves the sacrifice as a sacrifice so it can remain in force as a sacrifice for all generations through all ages. But in order to be preserved as a sacrifice by the salt, there must always be some object, and that is man. Therefore it is written: “Have salt in yourselves.” You are the salt of the earth. So, man has salt in himself. Mark 9:50. Without salt, no sacrifice. To be able to hand a whole sacrifice down to our descendants, we must have salt in ourselves, so we can hand Him (Jesus) down as a sacrifice. He can only be passed on to the next generation by the saints — those who are the salt of the earth. In other words, the saints are the salt of the earth who preserve Jesus as a sacrifice for all generations. Hallelujah, I’ve received light! God gave me this wonderful light just now. I wrote and reasoned my way to clear light. You see yourself the course it took.

How delightful are the ways of the Lord! Think what a holy mission it is to be salt that preserves Jesus as a sacrifice down through the ages. The apostles were salt to preserve the sacrifice for those nearest them; they in turn passed it further, and so it continues. Yes, in truth, I now understand Jesus’ deep words: “You are the salt of the earth.” No wonder the salt that loses its power isn’t fit for anything. Remarkable how God’s Spirit analyzes everything for us. We are the salt. The salt can’t bring forth life and vegetation, but the river can.

When you consider the writings of godfearing men and women down through the ages, it is the saints who have preserved them. The saints are the salt. But then the writings themselves must be a sacrifice!!! Because every sacrifice will be salted with salt — that is to say, preserved! This is the word of the Lord, and we don’t need to worry about what will happen after we are gone. If we are not freed from this concern, our work isn’t a sacrifice and, of course, can’t be salted, and consequently can’t be preserved. Here is a wide open field where the fruits remain when they are sacrificed and salted. What an amazing promise, what wonderful hidden treasures in secret places! We can’t admire God’s wisdom and majesty enough.

When your body is a sacrifice, I believe it can be preserved by the salt. Through your work in Christ many saints (the salt) will be active in praying for your life on account of the work God has given you to carry out, because you are sacrificed. God is exact in everything. He unites everything with the cross. When good health can be united with the cross, we know that to be healthy is God’s will, and then He gives good health. Many of the saints slept (died) because they lived carelessly.

Wisdom from God lengthens one’s days. Yes, we have a lot to learn about this. When our bodies are presented as living, acceptable sacrifices to God, we can be sure that these sacrifices are also salted with salt, because it is written that every sacrifice will be salted with salt. But the body is only salted with salt as long as it is a sacrifice. If the salt loses its saltiness, the sacrifice will rot — in this case, the body. It goes the same way with all other sacrifices. (Have you suffered so many things in vain?)

Warm greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 2, 1909 — # 94


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

Thank you for your good letter, and also for the book Thomas a Kempis. I’ve read some of it, and have found a lot of good things. I can’t understand where he got some of his ideas about hell, but there we just have to separate the noble from the ignoble.

Jesus says in Matthew 21:22, “And whatever things you ask in prayer, believing, you will receive.”

Since the meeting last Sunday morning and a time of prevailing in prayer at home immediately afterwards, I received full faith that God will heal you, and I have come to the place where I am thanking God in the Spirit that He will heal you. Now you, too, must demonstrate confidence in God in this matter and allow Him to complete His work. It will strengthen my faith immensely to see God heal you. God won’t let me down; if He were to break down my faith and confidence it would devastate me, and that is not how I have found God to be. On the contrary, Jesus has taught us to take the kingdom of God by force, and never to give up either in prayer or supplication.

It is my confidence in the teaching of Christ, the Spirit which is in the Scriptures, and the promises which are ours when we pray, that gives me the boldness to believe and give thanks as if it had already come to pass. Of course, you must obey God’s prompting within, just as you would obey an earthly physician’s advice — much more in fact. And, of course, you must be content with His guidance and with what He ordains, no matter what it looks like at the moment. I was glad to hear that you slept well the last few nights. So let us commit this matter into the Lord’s hands.

I read sister P.’s letter on the ship today. She worries a lot about spirits, but she doesn’t have any understanding about them. People have been very preoccupied with spirits lately, and they have behaved very childishly. Children can be frightened by stories about trolls and goblins, and that is what is happening here. True, we battle against spiritual powers of the air, but I believe we must have a realistic understanding of these forces, and not rely on our imagination.

Regarding T. and G., I don’t think you should come to them with something that seems new and exciting. On the contrary, seek to turn their vision in a very natural way toward Jesus’ footsteps.

We are so prone to try to make everything appear new — something no one has ever seen or heard before; but if a person does that, he creates a distance between himself and God’s people. The ones who do receive it will become puffed up and act like they are better than everyone else.

I think sister P. ought to hear a bit about this. And she shouldn’t expect her article to turn the world upside down. People are very slow when it comes to development in God. Many times I have thought I could turn conditions in the religious world upside down, but it has only led to my being more isolated. Maybe her zeal will lead her there, too. It seems as if she suspects something like that herself.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 5, 1909 — # 95


Dear Brother Aksel

Grace and peace!

Thank you for your letter which I just received. I am happy to hear that your physical condition is also improving, but there is one thing you still lack: you have not battled through to complete faith that God will heal you. God can restore your health in an instant, but unbelief is much harder to cure.

You ask us to continue to pray for you, and we will. I believe the Lord will overcome.

I do not believe at all that the illness itself is any match for God so that it would be difficult for Him to overcome it. God’s power is not on a lower level than the illness. When you believe that the Lord is going to overcome, you must mean overcome unbelief in the heart, for He is mighty to heal, and He wants to heal.

God’s healing is not directed to the body alone; He wants to heal a corresponding illness in the heart. That is why you can see that whenever Jesus healed people, they rejoiced and praised God with all their heart, because there was something within that had been healed. Let your task now be to battle through to complete faith for healing; then the Lord will heal you.

When sister R. was healed, we could sense in our spirit that she believed, and that is why it happened. Now it is up to you. You are the one who must break through.

This faith will increase your peace and joy, and thus belongs to the kingdom of heaven, which consists of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. And it is written that we must take the kingdom of heaven by force. That time has come. “Come now, and let us reason together,” says the Lord. He wants us to seek Him radically, fervently. He wants us to test Him to see whether His promises are true or whether they are merely fables. He wants to see the matter brought to a head; for God Himself is radical, and He has no pleasure in seeing us remain passive in a matter that is burdening our heart. “Ask, and it will be given to you; seek, and you will find; knock, and it will be opened to you.” Matthew 7:7.

If you believe this, you already have what you desire and can offer your prayers with thanksgiving.

Hearty greetings. Yours, striving in Christ,

Johan





Horten, December 10, 1909 — # 96


Dear Brother Aksel,

Faith brings victory.

Thank you for your precious letter and the book, In the Footsteps of the Lamb, which I received today. It was a joy to read your letter, since I was a bit apprehensive about possibly having been somewhat hard. But in confidence to your love for the truth, I wrote what I wrote.

Mrs. R. told me once that it could well be that I had received a ministry from God, but she was glad that she didn’t have to have such a task. I have often thought about this, because frequently things come up which are not exactly pleasant to carry out. But in confidence to God, I must be faithful in my task.

Interestingly enough, I found something very applicable to this ministry in the book you sent me. It said:

“He who walks according to God’s commandments, loves; for by his obedience he draws his brothers and sisters into God’s ways, and that is true love. This love will overcome in the end and will be recognized and appreciated, even if throughout its life it has been decried as hardness.”

It is regarded as hardness when, out of love for the truth, we seek to lead a soul into the footsteps of Jesus. The truth suffers terrible abuse in this world, and its servants must suffer with it. But this is, nevertheless, a glorious ministry; for in the end, if not before, it will be approved and respected.

“Hear, my son, and receive my sayings, and the years of your life will be many. I have taught you in the way of wisdom…” Proverbs 4:10–11.

“But the just shall live by his faith.” Habakkuk 2:4. You have prayed so much for faith. Maybe now you will get the opportunity to live by faith, i.e., that your life here in this world will be sustained by faith.

I have noticed that when we endeavor to do good, God does not withhold any good thing from us. God has fulfilled many of my smallest desires concerning the home to the most minute detail, and my faith has been strengthened much through this. “You have given him his heart’s desire, and have not withheld the request of his lips. He asked life from You, and You gave it to him — length of days forever and ever.” Psalm 21:2 and 4.

The Lord has appointed a time for every work, and when that time comes, He acts. At the same time, in the Spirit He causes us to think about the very things He has in mind to accomplish; for He will take of what is His and declare it to us. The Spirit takes what Christ has in mind and causes us to think about the same thing. In this way we can be in tune with the timing of God’s works. For a soul who is committed to God, taking heed to God’s timing is one of the most important factors in the area of serving. God has many things to accomplish before He declares the work complete. In the end we will see that all the promptings of God have worked together toward the final result. Therefore, blessed is the one who from these inner promptings can perceive the end result before it is manifest. If we understand this, we can be God’s co-workers. Here we can prophesy about things that will happen in the future, because all of His promptings point in one direction. I believe that we need to exercise and sharpen our senses in this area. Through everything we see and experience, we can get a better understanding of how God works. For how can a person be God’s co-worker if he doesn’t know how God works?

Thank you for Byposten. I read the article by T. and G. I believe that they will have to go through much before they are fit to serve in Spirit and in truth. The external grace for serving that was with them in the beginning was not their own, but God’s. They can’t continue to count on this grace. But, through obedience and humility, they can acquire an inner life and an inner grace which, in the long run, is far more powerful and abiding than the outward grace in times of revival.

Many souls deceive themselves by thinking that they personally own the grace and power which God provides when He uses them as an instrument. That’s just like an axe believing that it possesses the strength of the man who swings it. With this attitude, many go out to the mission field, even though they have difficulty overcoming the little trials that can arise at home — let alone away from home. Imagine how untried and unsuited such a soul is for the mission field.

This is exactly how it was with K. He thought that he was able to accomplish anything and was competent enough to travel far, far away to the heathen nations. But it was difficult for him to handle smaller matters. I think that to trip over a tree stump or slip on a banana peel would be good exercises for candidates for the mission field. It could be that the heathen would like to see something more than meetings being arranged. Then it would be good to have completed a course in faithfulness in little things.

Heartfelt greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 13, 1909 — # 97


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your unusually long letter, which I read to the brothers and sisters at a well-attended meeting yesterday and then sent on to Father today.

I also received a long, good letter from Father today. I have just written home replying to some of the questions that were most pertinent. As far as I can see, Father is getting closer and closer each time he writes.

Father says that the body of sin and the body of death are the same thing. I believe that the body of sin is the sinful element in our human spirit which permeates our body, whereas the body of death is our earthen vessel. The body of death is directly related to the body of sin. Let us say that the body of sin is the subjective element, and the body of death is the objective element. The body of sin has not yet been examined by my conscious judgment, but the body of death has. This is certainly a difficult matter to interpret, but I wrote a little about it to Father because he mentioned it.

It’s getting on toward Christmas, and we would be very glad if you could come here for the Christmas holidays. Yesterday we had the breaking of bread.

Just these few lines with a brotherly greeting from your devoted brother in Christ,

Johan





Horten, December 17, 1909 — # 98


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter, which shows that God has given you grace to abide in the realm of the Spirit, and that you have a sensitivity for things which are unseen. I believe we will learn wonderful and amazing things from God when our faces are turned toward Jerusalem and we serve before His face. Those truths you wrote concerning spiritual qualities are wonderful. The more we are perfected, the more our human qualities will diminish and we will show forth only Christ, just as Christ showed forth only the Father. Or, to put it another way:

“For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the church.” Ephesians 5:31–32.

The Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and Christ was justified in the Spirit. Now with us, it is the Spirit that comes to us first, and then the Word. The Word corresponds to the flesh. The Father draws to the Son; the Spirit draws to the Word. The Word became flesh; therefore Jesus could say, “My flesh is food indeed.” Jesus was the Word personified; that is to say, His flesh was the Word. What He spoke was the Word of God, and what He did was the will of God.

We read that Christ and the church (the bride) shall become one flesh. This means that God’s Word becomes flesh in us. The bride is not only one spirit with Him, but also one flesh.

Through hearing, believing, and obeying, our life will become so exact, our speech so perfect, and our relationships so pure that it can truly be said that the Word has become flesh in us.

When the Word becomes flesh, you can also win others without words, just as the wife does by her conduct, or as Jesus when He was silent before Pontius Pilate.

Here we can see more clearly how the bride becomes one flesh with Christ. This mystery is great, Paul writes, and now we can understand how very well this truth has been hidden.

So, the more the Word becomes flesh in us, the more the qualities of Christ will come forth in us. This is the same as what you wrote. I have only explained it in another way and given it a basis in the Scriptures.

Christmas is approaching. It will be wonderful to be able to speak together about these things which are closest to our hearts.

Warm greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 20, 1909 — # 99


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your letter that came today. I don’t think you should send that circular letter to F., since it contains a reprimand. It would only hurt him, and the effect would be the opposite of what was intended. In the military it is considered to be a much more severe punishment when a reprimand is given in the presence of others than when it is given privately. You know that a person who is 60 or 70 years old can be easily hurt. Personally, I have always had a reputation for being harsh. I have heard it so often now that it has become natural for me to think that I actually am harsh. So, it’s a pleasure, for once, to recommend gentleness. We need counsel, because in our zeal for the truth we are often in danger of doing things that can cause long-term damage. Cadet Aslaksen came by yesterday to say good-bye. He was going to travel home at 5:00 p.m. Brother Aslaksen is making progress, but he needs to be together with God’s people so he can benefit from the mutual help which is there. Circular letters are appropriate when all the recipients are on equal footing, but not when they contain a direct rebuke for one of the recipients. Paul sent letters with general exhortations to be read in the churches. But in this case, I believe it would be hard for F. to receive it in such a way that he could take it to heart as a guideline. And if he does not do that, the purpose will not be accomplished. He might get offended, and that would make things even worse. Christmas is only a few days away, and I think it would be best to keep the letter here until then. You can decide later if you want to send it out.

I have found that when I am most zealous for the truth, I am most prone to making mistakes. For that very reason God has stopped me many times. There is a zeal for God that must be controlled and allowed to produce longsuffering and patience in us. This zeal should have been directed outward, but since it cannot be received, it works in us as a consuming fire; that is: “Zeal for Your house has consumed me.”

Just these few words in haste. Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 29, 1909 — # 100


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for our precious time together during Christmas. It is always profitable to dig together for hidden treasures. I spoke with brother J. yesterday. He is now in such intense, fiery trials that he wasn’t able to go to the meeting in X’s home; instead, he had to go to bed earlier than usual. “No prayers and no comfort can bring respite from God’s dealings with me,” he said. The only way to peace is to go through the fire. We walked together to K., where we spoke in private about the trip and everything. The visit was quite successful. I have noticed that when someone throws stones at a dog, the dog comes with his tail wagging toward the thrower, who then doesn’t have the heart to throw any more stones at the dog. I believe that we can disarm those who throw stones at us in the same way. It was quite successful yesterday, at any rate. It might be a bit humiliating, but that is more than compensated for by the grace and results it brings. When we make the commitment to lose our life it is painful to have to leave everything. But after a time, when we see how the things we used to cling to begin to fade and perish, we are left with a tremendous joy over the fact that our heart does not have to perish together with and in that which is corruptible. This was the foreground. Now, to the background: The Methodist Church Christmas feast took place yesterday. There I saw faces that used to have the beauty of youth, but which are already marked by the ravages of time. There was a time in my life when I had to say farewell in my heart to all those happy faces and turn away to do God’s good and perfect will. This turning away kindled a fire of pain within me. But yesterday, when I looked at what had been so painful to leave, I discovered that my heart had only been set free from the things which fade and perish. I learned from this that he who does not break free in his heart will suffer disappointment and grief later when the things on which he set his heart waste away. But he who breaks free from the temporal when it is in full bloom will not be disappointed when it passes away, but satisfied. From this we learn that everything returns to us in due time. That which caused wounds will, with the passing of years, bring healing; or, what we lose for Jesus’ name’s sake we receive again.

Brother P. needs time to get to know us. He still does not know us very well, but he may come to that when it really dawns on him that we do not seek his goods, but him. For in this area he, as a man with money, has probably seen more than most. For when they all seek their own — seek something for themselves — they must seek it where they can find it. Then it is not easy to be someone with money.

Well, with this I’ll close by expressing my thanks to you for everything during the past year and by wishing you a new year rich in blessings and progress in Jesus Christ. I also wish you healing and blessings in the temporal matters.

Greetings from all of us here.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 31, 1909 — # 101


Dear Brother Aksel,

I am sending you this letter from Father. He would like you to read it. It appears as if he has received the circular letter with an open mind. I also believe that such impersonal circular letters will be profitable in the future if God so leads. I rejoice every time Father writes anything which indicates that he has received something of the knowledge of God.

Here in Horten we have had a spiritual “hail storm” again. Brother B. bombarded me with criticism concerning the last feast we had, where you were also present. And it could be that I deserved a beating, because I didn’t take the least consideration that there were people present who were sifting my words like wheat. Yet brother B. didn’t just use the whip, he drove in spikes with a huge sledge hammer and with all the strength he possessed. Through all this I am learning to bear more and more. Brother B. said that since I didn’t have love, my entire ministry was reduced to nothing, all my knowledge nothing, and everything was reduced to nothing. I felt like I had been hit on the head with a big mallet, and I thought about it all during the first watch. But now I have come to the conclusion that this was better for me than any amount of flattery. And besides, I was the one who initiated this method of battle in the beginning, so I should also be willing to take a blow.

The brothers and sisters here have become used to this, little by little, so today they can bear quite a bit more than in the beginning. So at least everything is pointing in the right direction.

Greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 4, 1910 — # 102


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for your good letter. Yesterday I received a nice, large, silk-sewn family Bible from brother X with the following inscription:

To: Johan O. Smith,

in deep appreciation for spiritual help

given to your lowly brother,

(signed)

I had been going through several spiritual conflicts recently, so this had a very comforting and healing effect. It was as if God wanted to overwhelm me with all His mercy and grace.

The ways of the Lord become more amazing and more marvelous to me every day, because I am truly discovering that the bitter becomes sweet to me. It was incomprehensible to me that I should receive such “honor of the Lord.”

It is not the one who commends himself that is approved, but the one whom the Lord commends.

May we always seek the Lord’s honor; then the will of God will always be clear to us.

I would really be happy to talk with sister P., for I sense that she has a sincere desire and that she is striving earnestly. Such people are as rare as diamonds.

You read about my last meeting where brother B. attacked me. I have given this much thought, but brother B.’s allegations were lacking something. I sensed that I had transgressed in some way, but I couldn’t see where or how. But yesterday it became clear. Speaking has something in common with eating meat. If a brother is sitting there and cannot eat for his conscience’s sake, then we ought not to eat meat. My conscience permitted me to speak as I did, but brother B. and several others couldn’t have said the same things without being wounded in their conscience. Therefore, I and my words were judged with their conscience as a yardstick. But when it says that we should be the slave of all, I have transgressed on this point, and I hereby acknowledge my mistake. But just as his three friends were unable to convince Job of his mistake and Job convicted them because their judgment was unrighteous, neither did I find brother B.’s words justified — he missed the point. However, God has revealed it to me now, and I am very content. We are supposed to learn from everything.

Hearty greetings from us here.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 19, 1910 — # 103


Dear Brother Aksel

I received your letter today; thank you very much. God has given us grace from day to day by the redemption which is in Christ Jesus. What you write is so true: there are threads running all through Christianity. One feels more and more the futility of it all “without these threads.” These threads consist of wisdom and insight, which lead like rays of light right into the Father-heart of God. Everything depends on our personal life. This life must be lived in all its details: in battles, in victory, in sorrow, in joy, in good report, in evil report, in sufferings, in persecutions, etc. We need individual training in the spiritual realm, just like in the military. Little by little we are coming back to the biblical doctrine concerning the necessity of having servants in the church. Without them, carnal elements arise and bring the entire work to the brink of destruction. In every local church there are many who need milk, which is why an evangelist is best suited as an “outward” leader. Actually, we can say there is an outward leadership and an inward leadership. Paul entrusted Titus with the important task of appointing elders in every city. See how far “on the inside” Paul was in the ministry. If it is an honorable thing to be an overseer, how much more honorable to be the one who appoints the overseer. Yet even greater is the person who gives instructions to the one who is to appoint the overseer. Behind all of these is Christ Jesus Himself. The more important a person is in the world, the more he is separated from the multitudes. The same is true in Christ Jesus. One who seeks to please the people must stay on the surface where the people are. But the more we seek God’s honor, the more we avoid all positions that are honorable in the eyes of man, in order to please God. This, in turn, makes us more and more qualified for the inner ministry. Titus 1, from verse 5. Moses appointed leaders over groups of thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens. Exodus 18:25. These things were written for our instruction. “Thus says the Lord of hosts: ‘If you will walk in My ways, and if you will keep My commandment, then you shall also judge My house, and likewise have charge of My courts; I will give you places to walk among these who stand here.’ ” Zechariah 3:7. We are the house of God. This house will be judged with a spiritual judgment, for the time has come for judgment to begin at the house of God. We must look after the outer court. The outer court represents those who have received the forgiveness of sins. We must take care of them, for we cannot judge them. I’m not trying to say that we will be able to do all this ourselves, or that we have the gifts for the task, but God will give us leaders. Solomon was also given leaders in different fields of work, but he had to coordinate everything. I am convinced that this is the way things are in Christ Jesus, as well. How unspeakably beautiful this is! The more life you have in God, the more you can reign with Him. We have a great High Priest over the house of God. This tells us that Christ rules over God’s house, and we are God’s co-workers. There was a ministry within the veil, and the children of Israel expected to receive their direction and the answers to their questions from within the veil. Let us press in through the veil both in life and in deed.

Read Exodus 28:30. Aaron was to carry the Urim and Thummim on the breastplate, over the heart; these signify light and perfection. By these things one could inquire of the Lord. It’s the same way now. If we have light in a matter and are perfect (according to our conscience), we can inquire of the Lord, and He will answer us.

Yesterday we were talking about how we are going to receive a new name that no one knows except the one who receives it. Revelation 2:17. Just as Jesus means “Savior,” and Cephas means “rock,” the name we receive will be a concentrated description of our entire existence in Christ. No one in the past, present, or future will have exactly the same qualities or tasks that you have, for example. In order to characterize your entire being and the content of your life in a comprehensive way, God gives you a name that no one knows but you. This name is so perfect that you will clearly understand that the One who gave it to you has long since searched your heart and your soul. This, in turn, will give birth to a reverence in the depths of your soul for the God who could give you such a name.

Warmest greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 27, 1910 — # 104


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for your good letter and for the invitation to come to Mjøndalen next Sunday. Today at 11:00 a.m. Pauline had a big, strong baby boy. We have now rented a little meeting hall for eight kroner a month, and a lot of people have been coming. God is called Wonderful and Counselor, and His works are unsearchable. For us, it is vital to be faithful in our calling and in our ministry, and then God will bless and establish our calling, our works, and our election. The Lord established David’s kingdom, and He will also do that for us if we hear His voice and are obedient. If you read 1 Samuel 11 and 12, you can see how totally united Samuel had become with the mind and counsels of God. He stood on God’s side and in His counsels so completely that he cried to God, and God sent thunder and rain in the days of harvest because Israel had chosen a king for themselves.

One can become well acquainted with the mind of God from the Old Testament. And in Him there is no shadow of turning. One can see His guidance and how He allows His servants to have a part with Him in His guidance.

As time goes on, I come to understand more clearly that to intervene immediately in difficulties is not God’s leading. Complicated situations in which we know something is wrong should first work patience in us. Then, when they have done their work, perhaps God will resolve the difficulty. Moses was the meekest of all men, and he had learned the wonderful art of “sleeping on a problem.” He who wages war ought to accept counsel, and all of our life is one long war. Wisdom is in the sight of him who has understanding. Proverbs 17:24.

It was a joy for me to hear that a number of people in Mjøndalen have turned to God, and also that God’s Spirit is working powerfully there.

“For our light affliction, which is but for a moment, is working for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.”

Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, February 10, 1910 — # 105


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for the time we had together. It was good to be together and even better to examine the results of the time we spent together. When Jesus was about to finish His course, the Father did everything to ensure that it would succeed. Jesus said: “O My Father, if it is possible, let this cup pass from Me; nevertheless, not as I will, but as You will.” But it was not possible. God forsook Him, and Jesus had to drain the cup alone. Until that point, grace had hidden this cup, but now it was to be emptied so that everything that was in God’s heart could come upon the Son. Here, it was a case of “either/or”! The Father put everything on the line. But at that very point the Son says: “Father, into Your hands I commit My spirit.”

When God has given us someone to work with, we too must put everything on the line. In order to bring someone to the place God has led us, we must be willing to risk everything — friendship, confidence, etc. We must go so far that they cry out in their desperation: “But Aksel, why have you forsaken me?” This is what it means to tear down idols on the high places.

As for you, all this speaking from the pulpit will destroy you, so that you lose that delicate inner relationship with God, because you can’t stand there as though you weren’t standing there; and since you can’t do that, your intimate communion with the Spirit will be broken, and you will be damaged by the honor that comes from standing before people.

All of this brings battle and inner unrest, and you will search in vain for those delicate inner bonds.

You are not to minister before people, but before God. You are not to be honored by people, but by God. Let the reproach of people, rather than their honor, adorn your head, as your service for God fills your heart with that deep peace which only comes by abiding in Him.

Look after the things God wants you to look after. Our deepest fellowship with God — as His co-workers — is held together by such delicate strings that we must carry out our work in quietness and in a hidden way if the whole thing is not to fall apart.

It was with pain that I felt these inner strings were not properly tuned. The situation with brother X requires that they must be properly tuned so that the mutual help that God gives in the church can be to everyone’s benefit. When someone causes these strings to be loosened, he has committed an inner transgression and sought his own honor, and no one has the right to do that. The result is that one loses one’s ability to minister, and the brothers and sisters who formerly had been nourished by one’s capability now suffer because of one’s inability.

I hope that you come next Sunday, if God gives you opportunity. Hearty greetings and thank you for everything.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, March 7, 1910 — # 106


Dear Brother Aksel

God’s grace and peace!

We certainly had a blessed evening at brother Ellefsen’s yesterday. Brother Aslaksen was in top form, and he prayed to God with tremendous power to be filled with God’s Spirit and with the power required for the task that God has chosen him to do.

Of course I am in full agreement with what you write about abiding in Christ Jesus and developing in Him, while at the same time completing the work which God wants done with sinners.

It is not the work with sinners which makes the difference, but probably rather the fact that the religious leaders push us up to the pinnacles of honor when we come in contact with them, and we cannot bear this without being damaged.

That is why it is far better to completely avoid working together with carnal leaders and to work by yourself as unto God. If we are to be vessels of honor, we must be vessels set apart. Working in this way also gives us most authority; their carnal display of honor is like a spider’s web — like Delilah’s scissors. If they succeed in capturing us, they will laugh right in our faces and gleefully pluck out our eyes. The right eye is spiritual insight, Madame Guyon says. We must keep every person at arm’s length — especially religious leaders. If we get too close to them, we will have no room to swing the sword of the Spirit. This godless concord with all kinds of people is indeed an abomination. It takes seven days of cleansing outside the camp to be pure from their defilement. (Let them return to you, but you must not return to them.)

Brother Aslaksen is becoming a true warrior. It is a pleasure to hear him. I sense that he has a deep love for us in the Spirit. I hardly recognize brother Ellefsen. All he talks about is walking in Jesus’ footsteps for the rest of his life.

Brother Torrey writes that often, in order to be able to work, one needs to be filled anew with the Holy Spirit, and this is absolutely right. He says that those people who continue endlessly in their old power and experiences go astray. This is worth taking heed to. I believe that we, too, need greater power for our work.

Brotherly greetings.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, March 12, 1910 — # 107


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for the letter I received. I see you are not planning to go home. I received a letter from Father recently. He is half-expecting us both to come and says he’ll meet us at the docks.

Yesterday we had a very enlightening conversation about Romans 7 at brother Ellefsen’s house. God has richly blessed us with these truths. Brother Aslaksen was here a couple of days ago. He is without a doubt one of God’s chosen instruments, and he is in development.

Sister X received a great deal of light about the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings, the deeds of the body, and the works of the flesh. God’s Spirit made it so clear to us that we rejoiced greatly. Brother Ellefsen said that things are becoming clearer and clearer for him.

God’s ways are amazing. My longing is that God’s people may be thoroughly rooted and grounded in the truth.

Madame Guyon writes that God’s spirit of leadership rests upon certain people. This spirit is not given to bring about rebirth, but to enable one to lead other people. If anyone has this spirit and is unfaithful, it will leave him and rest upon another; for it cannot perish. As biblical examples, she uses Saul and David, as well as Judas (his place was given to another). She calls this spirit of leadership “apostolic.”

I’m writing this down because it deserves bearing in mind. One who is to lead and judge according to this spirit must be free from all reasoning when God’s will is revealed, since human reasoning must be excluded, she writes.

This is another way of saying that God gives apostles, prophets, pastors, evangelists, teachers, etc. for the equipping of the saints. It is certain that we need a Spirit from God to have care for others and be able to lead them, for we cannot do it of ourselves. She writes that God demands unconditional obedience and faithfulness from those souls who are to watch over others, and that is true. We cannot think of ourselves or our own comfort; we have to stand before God’s face in absolute faithfulness and love. Peter was given a serious reminder when he was given the task of watching over God’s flock.

If you decide not to travel, you are, of course, welcome here for Easter, but I think Father is expecting you at home. I am enclosing his letter, so you can decide for yourself.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 2, 1910 — # 108


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s grace and peace!

Our embarkation on the Norge was postponed on account of the return of Bjørnson’s remains to his homeland, but now we have orders to meet on board at 6:00 a.m. tomorrow.

Brother Aslaksen was here yesterday. God gave me grace to speak more freely to him than ever before about severing all ties. He laughed from sheer joy and took my words to heart. I have not been able to talk to him before so freely and directly as I have now. Brother Ellefsen was also here yesterday. He is developing steadily in the right direction.

God will stand by me and give me grace during all the battles here on board. We commit ourselves to the powers of God. It is His wisdom that solves difficulties and quenches wrath. Indeed, it is a glorious life, a healthy life, a life full of peace, of victory, of understanding, of power, of agility, and of all that is desirable in life. Maybe that is why it is called “life.”

I have sent Father’s song book, as well as the booklets and tracts on board the Fram.

And so, a hearty greeting from us all.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, May 22, 1910 — # 109


Dear Brother Aksel,

Today (Sunday) it is my turn to take the watch on board. God has stood by me and given grace and victory. The story of what took place in the steam launch has led to the result that there are now “swabs” to dry with in every boat. This order was given by the commanding officer, and I haven’t heard any more about the matter.

There have also been some conflicts since, but God has given me power, so that yesterday it seemed to me as if the one concerned was making a real effort to get on good terms with me. It’s amazing that one can’t be left in peace without all these conflicts. Yet I know that God will give me full and complete power over the man, so that only his rank is left to him and he has no other claim, either on God, people, or me. It is stupid and barbaric to command people to sit down in a boat which is flooded with water when it is big enough to stand up in. You can believe there is much (X has just come in) to battle with. My spirit within me cries out over all the wretchedness I see and hear, because Satan rules so powerfully in and among unbelievers.

X came into the cabin. He said that he often wanted to come in, but always turned away at the door. We prayed together, and he wept and asked God to save his soul and forgive him his sins. He said he has felt a drawing to God from the time of his mother’s death. He is a sincere and serious soul.

I have to close for now. God has strengthened my soul; His name be praised! The ungodly rack their brains to find ways to break me down, but the Lord strengthens me with His power and gives me grace to overcome their clever plots. For as surely as Christ overcame, so we will overcome by Him.

What all this is leading up to, I don’t know; but God knows, and He is the one who gives strength.

A hearty greeting to you and the brothers and sisters from your brother battling in the Lord,

Johan





Horten, May 25, 1910 — # 110


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter, which gives evidence of your understanding, and therefore contained balm.

Where does it come from, and for what purpose do I feel a holy battle within me day and night against powers which seem to have their origin in the rulers of the darkness of this age? I am utterly convinced that it is God’s Spirit within me stirring up this battle, inspiring me to maintain and enlarge its domain. The peace in my heart and my good conscience absolutely forbid me to smile and act as if everything were just fine. My relationship to my superiors is sharpened through this; seriousness and battles take the place of “glossing over.” Now, by the grace of God, I am left in peace here on board. No one tries to dominate or intimidate me any more. This peace is not a fruit of flattery, but a fruit of battle. You understand well the difference between these two kinds of peace.

There are also several other ways in which to have peace, but the peace of God in Satan’s domain is only obtained through lawful battle. All this is ordained by God, and I take it from His hand. God has helped us up to this day, and He will be with us always, even to the end of the age. Our character is strengthened and tempered by battle. It is when you come close enough to use the sword that you can fight and perish, or fight and overcome. If you give up, your mind will be corrupted, but overcoming by the power of God and in God’s Spirit gives double strength to the soul.

We are to be perfect, as our heavenly Father is perfect — He who shows no respect of persons. When this perfection is lived out, it will reduce the honor of the great and raise the lowly from his reproach. The consequence of this is that the lowly, in turn, will feel honored and the great dishonored, even though they are not dishonored. But every exalted person needs to be cast down from his imagined pinnacles onto the plains of reality.

There are many kinds of peace. One is the “peace of grace,” where the person is at rest while unarmed in the midst of his adversaries, oblivious to all danger. Then the light comes, and he begins to see. And with seeing comes battle. Peace in this state must be won in battle. This peace may be called “the peace of victory,” since one absolutely cannot come to peace in any other way than by fighting for it. Whether a “peace of sufferings and patience” comes in the end — I do not know. At any rate it would not be a “peace of ignorance.”

We must pursue peace in every way, even if it means fighting for it with sword in hand. My battle here on board has been for peace, and God has granted it to me. But the price of this peace has been so high that, to be honest, I have felt quite miserable.

The person I have had the hardest battles with is beginning to retreat. He does not attack with the same reckless abandon as he did in the beginning. God gave me grace to touch the exact points where he was weakest. His pride prevents him now from laying himself open too frequently for more of the same, since he would rather have peace than a battle with such meager results. And in this peace we can be so nicely united.

This is the only peace that is sound and genuine. This peace keeps everyone in place.

Please greet everyone, and the very warmest greetings to you from your brother, kept in Christ,

Johan





Horten, June 12, 1910 — # 111


Dear Brother Aksel

“For all the promises of God in Him are Yes, and in Him Amen, to the glory of God through us.” 2 Corinthians 1:20. God’s promises to us receive their “yes” in Christ; outside the life of Christ there is no “yes.” Then, when these promises receive their “amen” through Him in us, God is glorified through us. God, in His great grace, has given me rest — blessed rest. Of course, I feel tribulations in the midst of rest, but no one is trying to start a fight any more. It has been the Lord’s war, and therefore it has also been the Lord’s victory. His name be praised and exalted! To begin with, we have peace without battle; but later, every single Canaanite must be overcome before we can get peace. These Canaanites are always outside the body, but victory and peace are enjoyed in the body. In the beginning I had to take up a defensive position. Later, I went on the offensive, with the result that now, by God’s grace, I have unspeakable peace among this swarm of unbelievers and the rulers of this world. I prayed and fought until, inch by inch, God gave me victory. I hope you understand. Brother Aslaksen sensed in his spirit that the same battle lay ahead of him, and he looked forward to it with joy.

“Therefore we do not lose heart. Even though our outward man is perishing, yet the inward man is being renewed day by day.”

During all this I have learned that all our battles and victories are prepared by God Himself, so that God shall be glorified through us and His kingdom shall be exalted. Nevertheless, in the midst of battle there is a fundamental requirement — that we discharge the responsibilities that we have been given — with zeal and exactness. This is a great strain on top of all the other spiritual friction, but it is vital if one is to be victorious.

I have had many conversations with brother B., and we usually spend shore leave together. Apart from that, things are about as usual. A seaman on board ship was recently reconciled to God.

I am not sure exactly where you are at present, but I assume that this letter will be forwarded to you.

Just these few, quick lines with greetings in Jesus Christ.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, June 15, 1910 — # 112


Dear Brother Aksel

Grace and peace!

Thank you for your good letter, which, in its entirety, was very refreshing, because I see that you are doing well and have kept to the sound path. You sent Isaiah 27:3 as comfort, but I could not see any comfort in this scripture at the present time. On the other hand, Psalm 139:16, which you sent for me to reflect upon, has given me comfort and food for thought. I will leave it to you to find out the reason, for this, too, belongs to God’s wisdom and must not be passed by.

You have undoubtedly noticed how short-sighted ungodly people are in their thoughts. They don’t think about the consequences. The more spiritual one is, the more far-sighted and meditative one is. In other words, when we seek perfection, we find that God’s thoughts, since He is perfect, are precious and very weighty. Verse 17. For my part, I have long believed what Psalm 139:16 says, and that agrees with Isaiah 63:19 and Jeremiah 1:5. Although the twins were not yet born and had not yet done anything good or bad — in order that God’s purpose according to His election might stand, not because of works, but because of Him who calls — it was said to Rebekah, “The older shall serve the younger.” Just as it is written, “Jacob I have loved, but Esau I have hated.” We can’t do anything about this. He makes known the riches of His glory on the vessels of mercy whom He had ordained beforehand to glory. Have you not experienced any of the riches of this glory which you see He has poured out upon us? Ephesians 1:17–18.

God has exceedingly precious and weighty thoughts and exceedingly great glory. He has had us in His thoughts from time eternal, and has brought us into existence at the proper time to accomplish the work that He prepared for us.

He has prepared works for us to carry out, enemies to conquer, goals to attain, and He has already seen us accomplish all these things in just the way we will complete them. All this is a great comfort to me, but this comfort can’t free me from the tribulation that’s continuing to do its work. For someone who is fighting, the only comfort is victory. That should be established right from the start — all other comfort is fundamentally false. When the difficulties have been overcome, one can rejoice with healthy and well-deserved joy. Until that time comes, there is nothing to do except fight.

Norway’s independence was planned, in God’s wisdom, long before it came to pass. It seems like it came suddenly, because we don’t have enough of God’s insight; but it didn’t come suddenly for God. What we experience today is only a part of the overall scheme of things, and our fulfillment of God’s will only hastens the glory.

Thanks be to God, who to this day has shown grace to me — a sinner, saved by grace. He has helped me through great difficulties. It is not His will for His children to be defeated. God’s will is that we shall leap over walls and run against a troop and walk straight ahead on the path that is before us.

When we are oppressed, God’s zeal is kindled against our oppressors, so that He withdraws His grace from them and lets it rest upon the vessel of mercy, who thereby becomes invincible. “By my God I can leap over a wall,” David says.

If God had not been with me here on board, I would not have overcome. But His good, far-sighted, and wise Spirit has mightily upheld me, enabling me to resolve difficult situations here. Moreover, His ever-present grace has been with me, allowing the right opportunities to come at the right time. I have peace now, but I have it in the midst of wolves who are planning their revenge. I have prayed much for victory here on board. Anxiety has often gripped me, because the enemy has been right at my throat. In His time the Lord will reveal the purpose of all this. But I notice that having my own cabin or not, having difficulties at work or full freedom — these things are becoming more and more immaterial to me.

A hearty greeting with Ephesians 1:22, together with this letter for you to reflect upon.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, June 29, 1910 — # 113


Dear Brother Aksel

I am writing these words during my lunch break to remind you of James 4:4: “Adulterers and adulteresses! Do you not know that friendship with the world is enmity with God? Whoever therefore wants to be a friend of the world makes himself an enemy of God.” David, who was a man after God’s heart, did not have any intimate friendship with the world and its princes. On the contrary, he was constantly at war with them. X’s letter to you provides me with the opportunity to point out the “unfaithfulness” in having fellowship with ungodly relatives. Why are they going to Sweden except to gratify their carnal lusts? If there is a mountain in their way, true faith will move the mountain; but I can scarcely believe that this mountain (possibly the mountain of money) can be moved by faith. While our aunt lived in prosperity she was often graced with visits from them, but now that poverty has come upon her, they never go to see her. That sort of courtship with worldly grandeur and mammon is unfaithfulness to Christ. I have spoken to Y about God, and he and his wife could hardly stand to walk two blocks with me. But they are interested in living in Z’s palaces and being driven around by his four greatly admired horses.

Vanity characterizes our generation. As long as a person still admires the greatness of this world, he ought to refrain from all spiritual ministry and stop writing poetry. If they had preached Christ to Z, he would never have dared to invite them. Only a lukewarm — an extraordinarily lukewarm — relationship with God would encourage our enemies to make such advances. “He who does not hate his father and mother, brothers and sisters … is not worthy of Me.” You should use the opportunity to send them a serious letter, full of exhortation.

Concerning all the admiration for “the man from India,” one must be careful that one does not idolize anyone, for that is angel worship. One thereby forsakes the head: Christ.

Please send these few words of love further — if possible — to the people concerned. Your devoted brother,

Johan





Warship Norge — Arendal, July 12, 1910 — # 114


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s peace! Thank you for coming here to Arendal. It is always so good to seek more understanding together.

Life is short, and we need to be awake. It seems to me that it is becoming more serious every day. Brother Ellefsen is becoming more and more established on the path of service for the Lord. Since his wife died, he is more purposeful than ever before.

I can’t give my “yea” and “amen” to Pastor P. His interpretations don’t even come close. With the greatest audacity he attempts to explain things that he has no understanding about, and that’s where he goes astray. There are many deep, human thoughts, but these cannot stand up under the scrutiny of the Spirit’s teaching.

In many places he is at a total loss when he tries to find support for his thoughts in the Scriptures. To put it mildly, the book is utterly unacceptable.

Pastor P. is of the opinion that when we receive the Spirit, both sin and its root are taken away and we become entirely holy. No, our spirit is not made alive all at once; it is made alive a little at a time. Pastor P. is against this. We are always being delivered to death for Jesus’ sake, that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our mortal flesh.

He is of the opinion that Romans 7 applies to a person who does not have God’s Spirit. He says we must always be on guard that we do not have flesh as our arm, but that we hold fast to the Head, Christ, and learn of Him who is a better teacher than all men put together. Just take a good look at the results of such teaching. At the heart of it is false liberty, even if he exhorts to good works outwardly — sort of halfheartedly.

When a person exalts himself, the results are always bad. We must listen for the Spirit’s voice and learn of Him if it is to go well with us.

Pastor P.’s book is full of a human, religious wisdom which God has never sanctioned. It has a hollow sound and lacks the rich, full tones of love. If you read Catherine Booth’s wisdom you will hear quite a different tone. God’s love is always effervescent, revealing thousands of ways into God’s Father-heart. God’s wisdom always testifies of the blood’s continual cleansing power and of our constant need of cleansing, both outwardly and inwardly. People want to pervert this beautiful teaching in any way possible in order to negate the effect of the blood.

Listen to the sound, dear Aksel. Try those who say they are apostles. Don’t accept everything as good. No, I know that you don’t.

With this, a brotherly greeting to you and those at home. From here we are going to Lillesand and then to Bergen.

Your devoted brother,

Johan





Fredrikstadleret, August 10, 1910 — # 115


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter. We are now anchored here on maneuvers.

God has a purpose in everything, including this. We can learn from everything in life. By God’s grace, this tour of duty has been very beneficial to me. It has been a severe battle, but God has given victory.

I often feel the need to be alone, but this place is crowded with people. Nevertheless, God gives grace so that I often feel as though I am alone in the midst of the crowd.

Paul says that he was weak in Christ and could live only by the power of God; these words are being more and more fulfilled in me by God’s grace. I have had a taste of this weakness, so that in the heat of the battle, I have had to rely solely on God’s power. But what a suffering for the flesh! The flesh trembles, but we shall triumph on the cross. Power used outwardly is praiseworthy, but when this power is directed toward my own crushing — as I commit everything to Him who judges righteously — then it is of far greater value for my development.

Victory over Satan is won on the cross. The blood of Christ is the victory and power; but before the blood there is a battle. The cross is the battleground where Satan’s head was crushed. There we find the secret of victory. What we call “the temporal” must be surrendered to death. The “temporal” that clings to our heart must be destroyed in the heart, so that we can receive it again in our heart. We cannot get back more than we’ve lost.

This coming Saturday and Sunday we will be in Horten.

Greet Father and Mother. Fondest greetings to you also from your brother,

Johan





Warship Norge — Horten, August 27, 1910 — # 116


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your letter from Larvik. I haven’t thought any more lately about the things I wrote to you in my first letter, but I have understood for a long time that the digging work among God’s people must go much deeper. It was not the title or the bold print used in your articles which caused me to write what I did. Perhaps my thoughts about superficiality were provoked after I heard reports from various quarters and especially after having read your statement that “only the cream” is served in that periodical. In my opinion that “cream” consists of half-truths.

All else aside, I am still of the opinion that we should do all our works as unto God, faithful to the truth. We should see things as they are (be realists) and not just carry on with this continuous “Good! Good!”; because the fact is that there is a great deal that is not good. Honesty brings reproach and humiliation; it is much easier to go along with the crowd and say everything is just fine.

I received your last letter from Arendal, and I have some idea why you write that power — conscious power — does not accomplish the same thing that faith does. Yet I do believe in conscious power, because unconscious power is uncontrollable and dangerous, first in nature and then in the spiritual realm.

The kingdom of heaven consists of power. Jesus was aware of His spiritual power, and so was Paul. Everything from God must become conscious for us. There is no power without faith. And it is no easy matter to know what is most effective in the kingdom of God. From appearances it seems to be best when the seed falls on stony ground and grows up quickly. Springtime labor doesn’t bear immediate fruit; we must wait patiently.

Starting Tuesday the 1st, through the 11th, there will be a change of command. It would be excellent if you could come to Horten then so we can really come to grips with the issues we don’t agree on. I believe that once we talk these things over in the Spirit and with our understanding we will come to agreement just as we always have before.

My ministry this summer has been to combat and tear down strongholds and high bulwarks which have exalted themselves against the knowledge of God. God has given me this task, and I must fulfill it in the grace and power of Christ. It is not within my power to change any of this. Mrs. R. said she was happy that she did not have such a task, but I thank God for it. I look forward to seeing you. Let me know when you’re arriving.

Your brother devoted in Christ,

Johan





Warship Norge — Sandefjord, September 16, 1910 — # 117


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter which came today, and for your postcard from Hamburg.

God’s wisdom is a boundless fountain. Unlike worldly wisdom, the more we dig here, the more things we discover which give joy and satisfaction in the very depths of our heart.

One of these fountains, which I found in your letter, has been a source of joy to me. You said, among other things, that the Spirit convicts us (the believers) of everything that is not in harmony with our position of faith in Him. That is so true.

We need to make a distinction between a person’s deeds and his condition. His condition can change. It changes slowly as a result of acknowledging the death of Christ. The deeds then follow correspondingly, but never so precisely that you can use them as a barometer to gauge his condition — even though they cannot differ very much.

You speak about a positive position of faith, won through judgment, which we personally maintain until the body of sin has been destroyed in that area.

Yes, that is the way it is. Thanks be to God for His great grace; He lets us win victory even when our enemy fights “positively” according to the flesh. A negative defense can crush him — something Jesus demonstrated clearly on the cross where He was led like a lamb to the slaughter.

Our enemies’ power is absorbed by our patience until finally there is no more power left in them to harm us. This crushes the serpent’s head. “And the God of peace will crush Satan under your feet shortly.” Hallelujah!

This negative defense brings out our weakness and compels us to rely on God’s power. This is the most effective of all powers. In other words: our negative defense opens the way for God’s positive offense, for when I am weak then I am strong.

Father sent me a letter that Grandfather wrote me in 1881. It is well written and contains several gems which indicate that he thought clearly and independently. You will enjoy reading it. He writes about God’s wisdom.

I am glad that you have been given the opportunity to work in God’s kingdom. Greet the brothers and sisters in Copenhagen when you get there.

Your devoted brother in Christ,

Johan





Horten, October 16, 1910 — # 118


Dear Brother Aksel

Today (Sunday) I’m on board standing watch. Thank you for your good letter from which I see that you are on your way eastward. I will be finished with duties on board about November 1. For many reasons, it would be good if you could put off your trip here until then. Maybe I’ll be able to get a few days leave. I will try to get at least 8–14 days, since we haven’t had one single day off all summer. There is a lot of work waiting for me on land, but I really feel ready to tackle it. I read your article in Misjonæren, as well as B.’s travelogue in Korsets Seier [a Pentecostal publication]. It appears as if these travelogues are the nourishment that forms the backbone in the Christians of our day. Maybe that’s the reason they give in to every breath of wind. There isn’t anyone yet, man or woman, who with real care and concern can meet the needs in the church — perhaps because there is virtually no one with a real inner life. I think all of these endless travelogues have a lot in common with the final shine on the carpenter’s work. He fills all the holes and cracks with varnish and polishes it until it looks bright and shiny. Everything looks beautiful; it wouldn’t be “in good taste” to say anything else. Yet these words of Christ stand firm, and I am getting closer to them rather than farther away: “And you will be hated by all for My name’s sake.” Servants of Christ are not to travel around enjoying the benefits of the Spirit’s work; that’s the same thing as fleecing the church in order to warm oneself with the wool. The apostles worked on a much deeper level than the “apostles” of our day who, by comparison, are nothing more than whitewashers. They never seriously rebuild the wall and repair the damage. They use the world’s glory to put a shine on the work of the Spirit. When those who are great in the eyes of the world turn to Christ, they are continually flaunted. Their outward glory is used to try to glorify Christ. If a poor working man or an old woman give their life to God not much is said about it, but when someone who is admired in the world gets converted, people shout “Hallelujah” in chorus, as if such a soul were more precious in the Lord’s eyes.

But this is what James exhorts us against: “My brethren, do not hold the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with partiality.”

When one makes such distinctions, one has become a judge with evil motives, the apostle says.

Nowadays you don’t find apostolic church-life or apostles like those in the days of old. One must be resigned to suffering and tribulations within the church — if one is to be able to help. But when someone visits the church, stays for a while, and then leaves, like some great man who is admired more according to the flesh than according to the Spirit, that is nothing more than fleecing the sheep.

I’ve just come back from supper in the mess hall where a lively conversation was going on. God gave me grace to take out my Bible and use it to convince them, and to testify (with sword in hand) of a personal faith. Most of them seemed to be satisfied with the explanation — but there were a lot of “ifs” and “buts.”

On his last day as a cadet (senior cadet) on board the Frithjof, Lieutenant Aslaksen stood up and gave his testimony for his classmates. Many had tears in their eyes. The last time he was home he asked if we could go through the Epistle to the Romans during the winter. He will be having more lectures and not so much reading at the Naval Academy.

This tour of duty has been a time of battle, but thanks be to God, everything has worked out for the best. We have a new commanding officer and a new executive officer now, and the situation on board has changed beyond recognition.

He who builds a house ought to dig deep and lay the foundation on solid rock. It is just the same in the church; we must dig deep so it can be securely rooted and grounded in Christ. Digging in the earth is hard work, but digging into the corrupted ground of the heart is even harder.

I hope we get a chance to talk together in the next few days — God willing. As it is now, my work on board takes up all my time. We do have a little time free in the evening, but we must be back on board again by 6:00 a.m. which means getting up at 5:00 a.m.; so I’m not up to much when I get home from a hard day’s work.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Warship Norge — Horten, October 19, 1910 — # 119


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your letter which I received today. It was a pleasure to hear something from Arendal.

Regarding your letter to Pastor X, I think it will go over his head. Divine truths must be received in the power and conviction of the Spirit, not as persuasive words of human wisdom. God has given these truths to us in the power and conviction of the Spirit. You know how we have rejoiced in the Spirit over every truth we have received, and it hasn’t been a rapid process. We have only received a little at a time. If Pastor X does receive what you write, he will receive it as human wisdom. It will not be revelation of the Spirit. If he receives and retains these truths only through his human ability without them becoming living for him in the Spirit, his wisdom will remain human instead of divine. Look in 1 Corinthians, chapter 2.

“However, we speak wisdom among those who are mature, yet not the wisdom of this age, nor of the rulers of this age, who are coming to nothing. But we speak the wisdom of God in a mystery, the hidden wisdom which God ordained before the ages for our glory.”

Over everything glorious there is a covering. Only the word of the cross is able to tear this covering to shreds. So it is the word of the cross, God’s power, that is to open the way through this covering (the veil) which hides God’s wisdom.

The fact that X is a pastor and that he is a learned man means absolutely nothing. The covering opens just as quickly for an uneducated person who opens his heart to the word of the cross as for an educated person who does the same. God’s wisdom is not a fruit of human efforts, and God does not give it in return for human efforts. God’s wisdom is a fruit of obedience and faith, and it is retained by obedience and faith. It is a stumbling block for the Jews and foolishness for the Gentiles. In short, if we try to plant the wisdom of God in a natural mind, it will be natural, human wisdom in him, which he has no use for in the spiritual realm.

Consequently, Pastor X must be taught to open himself to the word of the cross in truth and to let reality make things real in his heart so there can be a real result. Only then can we come to real wisdom. Until this happens, God’s wisdom will continue to be hidden for Pastor X just as it is for other mortal creatures, because God is no respecter of persons.

Hearty greetings. A brother is sitting here waiting for me, so I have to hurry.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, October 22, 1910 — # 120


Dear Brother Aksel

Grace and peace!

I’m just sending a few lines concerning your last article in Misjonæren. You write among other things, “…and simple minds make these things into main doctrines, only causing divisions, etc…”

It appears that you have been a little zealous trying to make your point, but if you think a little more about it you will no doubt realize that neither simple minds nor great minds can do anything about how they are. A tall man can’t be praised nor a short man ridiculed, because by doing that, one actually is opposing God who created them. For that matter, the way in which you use the word “mind” actually nullifies one’s personal responsibility to reason consciously. A mind of itself can neither be faulted nor blamed.

In the world, people speak of “great minds.” They mean people who are “broad-minded” as they vainly call it, and they speak of “simple minds” as those people who are “narrow-minded,” etc. But that’s not the way it is in God’s kingdom.

A mind [in this context] can’t make itself great or simple. The Father of spirits has created it as it is, and nothing can be done about that.

I thought it necessary to say a little about this; I’m sure you will understand it yourself when you read this.

A spiritual article will often have one or another blind spot, as a result of the writer not being watchful. I’ve caught myself in this more than once. Port Arthur had its own blind spots, and the Japanese were clever; they sent their vessels in at these points. Sister X has enough knowledge; now she needs to practice what she knows. This knowledge can breed worms (here I’m thinking of the manna in the wilderness) if it is not applied to practical life. I may write something along these lines to her. You’ve received many letters now.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, November 17, 1910 — # 121


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for our time together in Mjøndalen and for your letter.

It’s not a good idea to get involved in such matters. In any case, thorough repentance is necessary. X has displayed extreme weakness, and it is very likely that she is partly to blame for the problems that have occurred.

We learn from this that we should not be so quick to confide in a person, but rather be good and faithful stewards of the mysteries of Christ. We must not allow carnal refinement to be a bridge over which Satan can walk into the chambers of our heart.

Worldly wisdom on the cross!

Worldly refinement on the cross!

Ungodliness of every sort on the cross!

“Not everyone who says to Me, ‘Lord, Lord,’ shall enter the kingdom of heaven, but he who does the will of My Father in heaven.” “…eternal life to those who by patient continuance in doing good seek for glory, honor, and immortality.” Romans 2:7.

The cross will not allow us any sort of union with anyone who is outside of Christ, so the only hope we have of being united with them is by preaching the gospel to them.

Brother Aslaksen said yesterday on the way home that he had often upbraided himself for not having spoken more to people about God than he had; but now he sees that Christ was only sent to the lost ones — only to those who were in need of healing — and the same is also true of us.

Just these few lines this time. It was blessed to be in Mjøndalen. Hearty greetings from all of us here. Just come down whenever you like or when you have something special on your heart. We’ll talk together about it, and God will make things clear for us.

Your devoted brother in Christ,

Johan





Horten, November 30, 1910 — # 122


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for the time we shared together. Last Sunday, November 27, was a glorious day. Brother Aslaksen rejoiced on the way home from the station. Again last night we had one of those marvelous, enlightening Bible studies. God’s Spirit divides and separates for us, so that we sit in amazement and thank God for all His grace in and through Jesus Christ. The day after we were in the water, my legs felt a little stiff, but I got over it. Brother Ellefsen also feels well. Karl Pedersen said that on Sunday he made his peace with God, and that now his burden has disappeared. He prayed at the last meeting.

Brother Aslaksen told us that he had written home telling them to be prepared that one day in the near future he would resign from the Navy altogether in order to give himself completely to the Lord’s service. He is asking God to deal with him quickly so he can enter into fellowship with Christ in His sufferings and be allowed to suffer for Christ’s name’s sake. He is an amazing man. He says himself that he has made great progress in the last month, and it’s true. He is very quick to grasp many things, and he has a spirit of prayer. I can’t help wondering what the future holds for this man.

As usual, God’s Spirit is working tirelessly, and I believe He will now reveal mysteries for us regarding the work of ministry, the results of prayer, etc. God works systematically concerning our development, and we mature in our ability to believe and to serve. Certainly, the common thing is to serve in God’s kingdom unconsciously, without any clear direction of faith; but I believe that God, who has revealed a clear direction to us in the knowledge of Him, will also give direction to us now regarding the ministry. Then we will be able to act in real faith — with much more certainty and resolve — without this constant guesswork. I believe God is able to give clear direction here, but we must mature in order to receive it.

You see that we are learning about “direction in the work of the ministry” as opposed to “direction in the development of one’s personal life.” I understand very little in this area, but I do understand that the apostles in their ministry worked with definite direction in the faith, and didn’t beat the air. This is the very thing that has produced a desire in me to come to spiritual clarity concerning this unknown area which is so poorly mapped in our time. Actually, we are just explorers, so we mustn’t be surprised if we discover things we haven’t known about before.

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 7, 1910 — # 123


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter received yesterday.

I have thoroughly examined my heart regarding the matter we have corresponded about to see if it was at all possible to agree with those who feel they have suffered unrighteously.

God has given me this mind: that I wholeheartedly desire to support those who are in the right. But the judgment of my opponents does not fit my transgressions.

In my zeal for the truth, I’ve often gone too far, and my enemies have then rejoiced and dug in their claws. But God has always given me grace to overcome them again and keep them at a distance.

I’m afraid that if they got the upper hand, they would treat me like the Philistines treated Samson; but God hasn’t allowed that, and He won’t allow it as long as I abide in the truth. I know that I have many faults; I acknowledge that. And I know that in the heat of battle, blows can be struck that are not strictly lawful. But this in no way means that my enemies will be allowed to overcome me and then poke out my eyes. Jesus’ enemies lay in wait to catch Him in what He said, and the same sort of scheming goes on today. However, it is the spirit in the matter that we must test, not the words themselves. If the spirit is false, we can refute it, even if the words themselves are correct. However, if the spirit is right — even if the words are wrong — there is nothing they can put their finger on.

I believe that there is a liberty among those who are close in spirit that cannot be exercised among others. You told me how you had to restrain yourself when you were together with brother X. You can throw off this restraint when we are together. The farther apart two people are spiritually, the greater restraint one must exercise in order to avoid violating the other’s conscience. Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. I love this liberty with all my heart, and I long for it to be practiced among the brothers. However, I understand more and more that we must constantly exercise restraint and just feel our way as to what is pleasing for others. As a result we have less and less liberty. We again become enslaved, not for our own sake, but for the sake of others.

The prophet Elijah made Baal’s prophets look like complete fools. He asked them to shout louder in case their god was out traveling or perhaps had gone to sleep. You also spoke about this in Misjonæren when you attacked those who had “hopped” from Romans 6 to Romans 8.

I don’t think that the prophet Elijah’s sarcasm was of the devil; on the contrary, I think that it fit the situation perfectly. We must examine the motives — also the motives for sarcasm. When conviction and light shine clearly on the folly of a situation, then sarcasm can be a useful tool.

However, I understand what you are saying, and in the future I will be more careful, because there is a certain satisfaction in exposing others’ faults; and in that, the flesh can even receive nourishment. Such “revelations” ought to be accompanied by suffering. Then they will have a positive effect on the one whose faults are exposed and will encourage confidence and trust. On the other hand, if we allow the flesh to gain any satisfaction from exposing others’ faults, then the one who has been exposed will become even more hardened, and the situation will go from bad to worse.

The point is that we need to consider whether we can win the person or not; a fool should be answered according to his folly so that he doesn’t become wise in his own eyes.

The main thing is this: If we love Jesus Christ and desire to do what is right, then things will go well for us, even when everything is upside down.

Hearty greetings from your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 7, 1910 — # 124


Dear Brother Aksel,

Grace and peace from God through Jesus Christ!

Thank you for your good letter. In just one hour changes have taken place here. At 1:00 p.m. today, brother Aslaksen submitted his resignation, which was one solid testimony to Jesus Christ whom he has determined to serve totally and undividedly for the rest of his life — maybe as a missionary. At 2:00 p.m. they sent for him and asked him to take a few days leave of absence in order to discuss the matter with his parents before he proceeds with his resignation, which was addressed to the King. He was given a leave of absence until Sunday evening, and we have just taken him to the railway station.

At 2:00 p.m., just as brother Aslaksen was talking to the head of the Naval Academy about his resignation (effective January 1), Captain Kjelland, the head of our Corps, telephoned the Naval Academy and summoned me to the office immediately. When I arrived, he told me that he had been asked by the Admiral-incommand to find a reliable man to serve in the Enlistment Department for General Seiersted. He asked if I would take this position. I would initially have to apply for a leave of absence from the Navy for two years, starting January 1. I could serve as a civilian, since the job is of a private nature. The General’s office would be at the Naval Society, and he would be gone from Horten much of the time, so I would be on my own a good deal. I thought this was a very good offer and accepted it at once.

God’s leading is amazing. General Seiersted has been in Kristiansand; I’m sure you know him. It doesn’t matter to me whether I write for the General or the Admiral; and when such a nice position was offered me, why not take it? In this way I will avoid going to sea for those two years.

I cannot say enough good about brother Aslaksen; he is one of the few. God must have a particular purpose with him. It is amazing to hear the wisdom he has received from God. A spirit of revival accompanies him, and I believe that there is an unusual stirring among us here now.

You are welcome to come here on Saturday evening if God should so lead. It would have been desirable to have had brother Aslaksen at home also. I asked him to take a trip to Mjøndalen, and he wanted to go, but had too little time.

God has richly blessed the Bible studies. We’re having them twice a week. Write me a few lines if you are coming. It’s always so blessed to speak and work together. Thank you for the telegram. We talked about the reference mentioned. We kept things going until midnight and had a wonderful time.

Pauline sends greetings. Greetings with Proverbs 22:4.

Yours,

Johan





Horten, March 2, 1911 — # 125


Dear Brother Aksel

Grace and peace from God through Jesus Christ our Lord!

Thank you for the two letters. I need to think some more about the last one.

Brother Andresen from Oslo is here now; he prays night and day. We had a blessed meeting at our house yesterday. It really would have been good if you could have come while brother Andresen was here. Over him, like over everything else that is glorious, there is a covering; but in Christ the covering is taken away. When he’s been by himself, he has prayed aloud for “Smith the dentist in Mjøndalen,” and he prayed that you would sense his prayers for you.

“The commandment of the Lord is pure, enlightening the eyes.” Psalm 19:8. “For all His judgments were before me, and I did not put away His statutes from me.” Psalm 18:22. There are commandments in the midst of freedom. There is a cross in the midst of the gospel. There is a longing in the midst of rest, and even in the blessing we have already received, we sense an urgent yearning. Always forward, forward, forward.

Those who are godfearing see the Lord’s commandments, but the ungodly “opened their mouth wide against me, and said, ‘Aha, aha! Our eyes have seen it.’ ” Psalm 35:21.

We must follow God’s commandments precisely. “Samuel said to Saul … because you have rejected the word of the Lord, He also has rejected you…” In other words, God yearns for the Word to be personified in us. The Lord’s commandments must become part of our very nature, then we can be received into the eternal dwelling places.

The Spirit of the Lord dwells in the Word of the Lord. Outside the Word you can find many spirits, but you won’t find the Spirit of the Lord. The Word is flesh in Christ, and by the life-giving Spirit, it transforms us into and according to the same likeness. But remember this! The Spirit and the Word cannot be separated. The Spirit and the Word are quite different. The difference is that the Word can become flesh, but the Spirit is Spirit and remains Spirit. The Word comes into existence by the Spirit, not the Spirit by the Word. But since the Spirit is perfect, His Word is also perfect. People make houses for themselves, and the foxes make dens. But the Lord creates a dwelling place for Himself by His Word, and we are His house.

“His power makes us into what we ought to be.”

Hearty greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, December 15, 1911 — # 126


Dear Brother Aksel

Thank you for your good letter. It was blessed to read what Mrs. Penn-Lewis wrote about a victorious life in faith. It is this mountain-moving faith that is able to break down and destroy all loftiness and exalted schemes against the knowledge of God. You quoted something from the sermon given by the mission priest J. to the meeting of “The Elite Club” — a fitting place for darkness to gather. It was sickening. They have to come up with something when they refuse to believe the truth in all simplicity. There was to be a discussion afterwards, which there presumably was, since he met with opposition. But you said his abundant hospitality kept you from letting him know what you really thought about his ideas. I understand this to mean that his abundant hospitality hindered a perfect victory over folly. But is that right? Shouldn’t we, in faithfulness to Christ, refuse to admire all that is highly esteemed and honored in this world, even if it costs us our honor? In this way we can win a crushing victory in these dark societies where they imagine themselves to be so refined. When we have an opportunity to tear down and destroy the things which cannot tolerate the light, it would be unfaithfulness to Christ to draw back from doing so. It would be a form of preserving our own life. Our body must, in practice, be presented as a sacrifice. Then we can attack the forces of darkness, with full assurance that no one can harm us. God will give us grace for this by stripping us of our own honor and reputation. What right do we have to pity the flesh? Or to draw back from speaking out against it? None at all! True men of valor in God’s kingdom have been saved from the respect of persons. Thus they become unfettered (liberated) workers who, in the power of God, by faith, crush these satanic strongholds which rise up in opposition to the knowledge God gives. This is the arena where God’s invincible warriors have been battling throughout the ages. Partial victory gives partial satisfaction, but partial satisfaction is dissatisfaction. The conditions that must be fulfilled in order to get victory are hard for the flesh; but if our body is presented as a sacrifice to God in the midst of the battle, then victory is certain. But if we make provision for the flesh, we may as well quit — the sooner the better.

I’m happy we can spend Christmas together. Christmas Eve is on Sunday this year, so you must not come any later than Saturday.

Skjulte Skatter will work like a snowplow. As it is now, people cannot see the way — everything is white, completely covered with snow. Indeed, Satan rules in the form of an angel of light.

Greet brother Aslaksen. You wrote in a letter that you want to live and die poor. In this context, read Psalm 15 from the beginning, and give special consideration to what is written after the comma in verse 4, then relate that to what is written in verse 1. indeed, all good things follow in the wake of God’s wisdom, for wisdom makes us the head and not the tail. So Wisdom, which has wealth and honor in her hands, will not allow us to be very poor. Neither can we become rich, because we are to use the unrighteous mammon in such a way that we will be received into the everlasting habitations.

Brotherly greetings.

Your brother,

Johan

NOTE:

In the course of the years, a bundle of letters has been lost. Note the date on the next letter.





August, 1914 — # 127


Dear Brother Aksel

We are living in terrible times, but in the day of trouble He has kept us safe in His shelter. He has used the sea to separate us from the wars on the continent. You spoke about a false peace which will come after this war. I, too, believe that a dangerous peace will come, a peace that will defy the judgment of the sword of God and will give ungodliness a lasting foothold. This peace will be built upon love of this present life and love of earthly things. People will try to establish a lasting peace, which will be a counterfeit of the peace Christ gives.

Lawlessness will flourish in this peace, for humanism’s time has come, and the authorities will, to a certain degree, bear the sword in vain. We can clearly see the effects of this spirit by the poor discipline in the Navy now. More and more, people do just what they want. This will make it very difficult for God’s people, because it will be much more a matter of individual choice whether or not one will submit to the laws of the land. Previously, civil laws helped to restrain the flesh to a certain extent. But this increase of liberty will give people a more “elastic” conscience and make it more difficult for God’s Spirit, who guides with His laws and instructs with His commandments.

Socialism will flourish, and so will anarchy and contempt for God. This will prepare the way for the Antichrist, even as John the Baptist prepared the way for Jesus. John turned the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers. The spirit of Antichrist will encourage disobedience to parents. This is an abrupt departure from the present order and a sudden introduction into a new, lawless time.

We are children of the day, so this time of lawlessness shall not come upon us unexpectedly. Just how are the hearts of the fathers turned from the children and the children’s hearts from the fathers in this time? Through divorce and remarriage, just as in the days of Noah. And not just once, but over and over again. Families are broken up, and hate is implanted where love was meant to flourish.

The people are in control, and the authorities seek to please the people who have given them their authority. In this way the opinion of the majority will influence every judgment, and since the majority are in the flesh, judgment will be perverted.

What shall we do? Through our life and our teaching, we must impress the obedience of faith upon the coming generation and upon all who will listen to us. This is the victory that has overcome the world — our faith. We need to leave an indelible impression behind us in this perverse generation, and we should leave behind living letters for the coming generation. I don’t mean letters written with pen and ink; I mean brothers and sisters in whose hearts the Holy Spirit has been able to write and accomplish His will. If God is able to accomplish this in and through us, then our life will not have been in vain.

NOTE:

The above letter was found in 1982 among some older letters. It was written by Johan O. Smith to his brother Aksel right at the beginning of the First World War. It was prophetic, looking forward to the present day where lawlessness increases and abounds.





Trondheim, October 12, 1914 — # 128


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter which I received today. On Saturday evening we had a blessed Bible study at X’s house. We have now spoken a good deal together, and he is quick to understand things. He grasps glorious truths immediately. But I really don’t think he will be able to win anyone for the truth because, like so many others, he has a tendency to keep back his sword from blood. This is why so few win others for Christ. People like to teach, but they shrink back from using the sword. Blessed is he who dares to use it, who believes in the use of it, and who uses it lawfully. The Spirit rejoices over blood drawn by the sword of the Spirit. But only those with authority can use the sword, those who have learned to judge with right judgment. May we not bear it in vain. To win someone for the church, we must use justice and judgment: “Do you not judge those who are inside?” But no one on the outside has the understanding to come inside; this can only happen by the sword being sated with blood. This alone can satisfy the Spirit of truth. The man outside the body must be killed. Let us learn of David, the man according to God’s heart. May there be many men according to God’s heart today who will wage the wars of the Lord. Unfortunately, many are cowards, afraid of the sight of blood. If in a balanced way we can introduce this exceedingly important lesson into the church, we will quickly notice greater progress than ever before. But it takes a good ear to understand the law rightly and to use the sword rightly. In the last Bible study we talked about Romans 8, about the difference between the deeds of the body and the works of the flesh.

They had never heard anything about this before. We talked about being led astray from the ways of wisdom and ending up — finding rest — in the assembly of the dead as a “pew filler.” Opposition was on the verge of erupting, but there was such a blessed Spirit present that no one had the power to speak out against it. X was delighted. He could be of great benefit here if only he could understand to use the sword. What a shame that this understanding is so lacking. Paul understood this art and used the sword diligently, as did the Master Himself.

I wonder if the Old Testament priests will come forth in a new form through the use of the sword. Does anyone have the right and the boldness to come before God without this blood and this sword? I don’t think so. Time and time again, we have seen that the person who in his ministry for God keeps back his sword from blood carries out only half the ministry. The Spirit bears witness to this. Every experienced warrior of Jesus Christ has experienced this and will understand. And why should we be called warriors of Christ if we have nothing to fight with, and no one to fight against? No, God has given us a name as the warriors of Jesus Christ. Therefore, He has equipped us for battle. He also has enemies that we must fight.

Warm greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Valkyrien — July 15, 1915 — # 129


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s peace!

We just left Ålesund and are now on our way to Haugesund, where we will stay for several days. Later we will be sailing to Bergen. We will probably stay there four to six weeks to install anew windlass. The Lord has done marvelous things in Ålesund. They closed the door, but other doors opened, and everything proceeded as usual. This afternoon I was ashore, and I heard that they have now declared the doors open again, even though they have been open all the time.

In the last few days our opposers have been made manifest through their many unreliable statements and their great unrest, while the brothers and sisters have rejoiced abundantly. They say they have never experienced such days here. I am supposed to have been a wolf in the sheepfold, but they (those who have accused me) haven’t even come to the meetings. At one meeting I asked what kind of shepherds they had in that congregation, since they ran away when the wolf came. They understood the point.

I have written to you before about going back to the places where we have been in order to strengthen the brothers and sisters in faith. This is essential. Why don’t you think about it and see whether you can tear yourself away.

The second to last evening I was ashore, the brothers and sistersgave me a package with a gift and a souvenir from Ålesund. I opened it back on the ship and found a very nice silver spoon, onwhich they had engraved: “A memento from Ålesund 1915,” and on the other side the letter “S.” In order not to demean their goodness, I felt obliged to accept the spoon, and I intend to keep it as a memory of these dear friends and the days of battle in Ålesund, 1915. May God bless them.

Things that are now taking place were prophesied about long ago, but nobody believed they would be fulfilled in this way. The brothers and sisters here have received revelations, dreams, and words from the Lord in many ways. This has greatly strengthened their faith. An opposer picked a “mannacorn” which read: “Awake, you who sleep, arise from the dead,” etc. A sister took one for me that said: “Cry aloud, spare not.” One evening, a brother sat in deep thought over the things which had happened and felt somewhat disheartened. He took a “mannacorn” and got Jeremiah 51:10–12. Both he and the others in the house began to rejoice greatly. The opposers have been here the whole time, but now the brothers and sisters have power over them; therefore, they are rejoicing. Later I took these verses as the text for the meeting. See verse 30 in the same chapter. This verse fits the mighty opposersin Ålesund very well. The Lord is fighting for us, and everything is going according to His will in this matter.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Valkyrien — Måløy, September 23, 1915 — # 130


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter and for the manuscript. It was very good. You should only use the opportunity to exhort and rebuke when the matter of conviction has been settled; for it is written, “convince, rebuke, exhort.”

This issue of Skjulte Skatter will be a fighting one. It’s only reasonable that we should be allowed to defend the knowledge God has revealed to us. Let it be tried; it will be even more apparent that it is sound. These people have carried on as teachers for years, but the day God ignites a zeal in the spirit of His witnesses, their doctrines crumble right before their students’ eyes. It is very dangerous to assert as facts things which one has neither seen nor heard in the Spirit. Right from the beginning, God has taught me to be very cautious and never to teach anything to others which the Lord has not revealed to me by His Spirit. For that reason, I have had the great joy of seeing that all I have taught has stood the test of time. None of it has had to be altered. May God teach us faithfulness, so we never let our authority extend to things we have not seen.

Let their doctrine crumble completely. Spare not and fear not! Let it be reduced to rubble so that God can be honored through Jesus Christ and His knowledge can radiate, shining brightly on all the ruins of human loftiness. The opportunities must be redeemed, and even the least “slack” must be pulled in, so they get a sense that we are watching. God’s work has always started in lowliness, but nothing has ever been able to withstand its power.

I am enclosing a letter from brother Ellefsen. Send him a few lines now and again. He needs it up there in desolate Finnmark. Brother Aslaksen and I have agreed that all new songs should be sent to me, and afterwards to brother Berg, who will take care of the musical aspect. We need a song book. It is good that you are working in the Hurum area and that sinners are being saved in Drøbak.

Greet your wife and the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Valkyrien — Ålesund, November 23, 1915 — # 131


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s peace!

I am on board the Valkyrien again. Brother Thorleif Hansen and brother G. met me at the station in Oslo. We went to brother Hansen’s home and spoke together for an hour. Brother Hansen’s wife and sister were there. It is blessed to meet a faithful soul now and then on one’s way. I believe brother Hansen will be a blessing wherever God sends him. It was the first time I had met brother G. He seems to be a man with a searching, inquiring spirit — judging by his eyes. God yearns zealously for our spirit, whether we are gifted in the one way or the other. God’s Word is sharp; it divides soul and spirit, joints and marrow. But it is not written that the Word divides the same spirit. Where our human spirit has not been made alive, it is still bound to sin in the flesh.

I believe our glory in Christ depends on how much we have been made alive in our spirit. A person with the forgiveness of sins and nothing more will have his spirit separated from the body of sin as a pure human spirit. The same is true for that part of our spirit which has not been made alive; it will be separated from the body of sin together with that part of our spirit that has been made alive. It is pure, but it is human. But then comes the question: Can that pure human spirit and our living spirit exist in one body as one spirit? Yes, they are together now while sin is in the flesh; how much more and better when sin is taken away.

Since Christ did not see corruption because His spirit was completely separated from sin in the flesh, do we not have a right, in part — to the degree that we have been made alive — to be spared from corruption? No! We still commit deeds of the body, in which the whole body shares; and if one member suffers, all members suffer with it — permeated with the very thing that caused the suffering — sin. So, we analyze and understand in part and speak in part, yet God operates with the whole, the individual parts being factors.

Ultimately, our comfort and hope is that if One died for all, then all are dead. When an ungodly person dies and his body, with sin in it, becomes separated from his spirit, will he not then be in the same condition as a person who has received forgiveness of sins — with a pure human spirit? Yes, let us say that, but in his case, there is also condemnation for the sins he has committed and has not been cleansed from. This will cause judgment and condemnation throughout his entire spirit, so that the joy of being free from the body of sin cannot be enjoyed because of the curse that rests over him. Thus it will be fulfilled that everyone will receive according to his works, according to what he has done, either good or evil. While the ungodly person is experiencing judgment through his entire spirit because of his evil works, the godfearing person’s works, which follow him, will bring rejoicing in the Spirit. I have been thinking about these things lately. If you have any comments about them, please write and tell me about them.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Valkyrien — June 21, 1916 — # 132


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s peace!

Thank you very much for your good letter. It was a joy to hear about the conference in eastern Norway. Brother X came to see me on board the Valkyrien in Bergen. He was beaming with joy over such a glorious conference. He said he wouldn’t have missed it for anything. I had shore leave that evening, so he used the time to describe the whole conference in great detail. Brother Ellefsen also wrote a long, detailed letter about the conference.

The assemblies are growing, and our responsibility grows accordingly. It is vital that those who lead demonstrate an unshakable firmness. The assembly requires that. Only this can promote inner peace. Not everyone can govern. There’s a saying: “Too many cooks spoil the broth.” God has not given everyone the necessary gifts to lead or govern. I understand that God has placed pillars in the church. If these pillars remain unshakable in the things which they have heard from the beginning, everything will go well.

Now we can see that God has been working along with us far beyond what we could have imagined. Satan is not passive either.

That is why Paul knew that after his departure, wolves would come into the flock who would not spare the sheep, and that from the midst of the church men would arise who spoke perverse things. Paul, by the power of God, could keep those forces at bay, but when the leadership grew weaker, these elements would rise up and exert their will.

Many strong spirits are now coming among us who demand that everything must go just the way they think it ought to. And if it doesn’t, they will take over the leadership — mercilessly. That much you can see beforehand. I hear that many are still in doubt about whether or not sin was condemned in Jesus’ flesh. This is a great mystery of godliness, and we must be reconciled to the fact that it is not given to everyone to understand it. But those who don’t understand it should be kept in their rightful place, because it is faith that is to overcome, not unbelief.

We are doing very well here. We had a meeting last night. The brothers and sisters are more zealous than they were before, because they have heard the difference between where the cross is preached and where it is not preached. They praise God powerfully that this mystery of the cross has been revealed to them.

I felt it was God’s will that I was not at the conference this time, but I was there in my spirit, and God worked — in spite of conflicts — in the direction the work needed to go.

Greetings in Christ. Your brother,

Johan





Viking — Vardø, September 27, 1917 — # 133


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace!

Thank you for your most welcome letter. I hear that you are holding Sunday school classes and Bible studies. Both are very necessary. God will reward that labor in due time. Some people want to reap as soon as they sow, but all they reap is human approval in the form of “Hallelujah” and “Amen,” etc. We, on the other hand, must often sow with tears and grief in our hearts, but in due time, we will reap with songs of joy.

This doctrine is opposed on every front. “Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God.” Only a human spirit that has been torn free from the flesh, and that has realized through personal experience that Christ had to have come in the flesh in order to make this salvation available to him, is able to truly confess that Christ has come in the flesh. This spirit is of God. The spirit of the devil cannot confess this, nor can any human spirit that is still in the flesh confess it. This knowledge resides in the body as does all the other hidden wisdom of God.

This spirit, which is freed from the flesh through the blood of Christ, is the driving force in the new creation; it is the promised seed in Isaac. But the one who is born according to the flesh persecutes the one who is born according to the Spirit.

It seems that Christ manifested in the flesh will be the point of division in these last days.

“And without controversy great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifested in the flesh, justified in the Spirit…”. This justified spirit confesses Christ manifested in the flesh, because it has gone out of the flesh. We are no longer in the flesh, but in the Spirit.

The little flock that listens to us is not large, but it has victory on its side. Therefore it is more powerful and more tightly knit together than all the multitudes who resist us. So we go boldly into the battles ahead. We don’t cover our faces as Moses did. “For the weapons of our warfare are not carnal but mighty in God for pulling down strongholds, casting down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God, bringing every thought into captivity to the obedience of Christ.” This little leaven which God has brought to life is already spreading far and wide. Without show or fanfare, without preachers who make their living by them, these truths are coming to life in all quietness among people from Nordkapp to Lindesnes, from Stadt to Kjølen. And who can stop this rolling snowball? Thanks be to God, who always causes us to triumph through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Notice that it is written: “Every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ has come in the flesh is of God.” As I said before, the spirit of Satan cannot confess that. Men occasionally confess that Jesus was manifested in the flesh, but the Scriptures do not accept the testimony of a man. Man consists of spirit, soul, and body. In man, the law of sin is present in our members. The Son does not receive the testimony of such a person. The spirit must confess that Jesus has come in the flesh. This is the justified human spirit which has been saved from the flesh. That is why it says “every spirit.” If it were only God’s Spirit, it would not be written “every.” This is the righteousness that comes from God, and every tongue that opposes us will be condemned.

Greet your family and the dear young brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Vadsø, November 30, 1917 — # 134


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter in which you write that sixty people were gathered in your home for a feast. That’s an entire assembly! I rejoice over the good development in Drøbak. I think H. has understood better than ever before that there are good reasons for becoming vitally interested in this work, that the doctrine can stand the test of time, and that it leads to godliness.

Now it’s easy to work everywhere. The believers in Vardø are powerless against it. They have stopped talking about how dangerous our doctrine is, because their best men and women have joined us.

One day, after having been in great battles with some men on board, I lay down for a rest, opened a book in English by Madame Guyon, and these words caught my eye:

“I am your protector wherever you go.”

The difficulties disappeared, and I rejoiced in the Spirit. It fit my situation. From that moment on, everything here on board changed. My adversaries lost their power. I am unable to flatter people, and when they demand that I do so (not directly but indirectly), I come into conflict with them. People with power tend to flaunt it in one way or another until war breaks out. Then God guides each step. He crushes the necks of the ungodly and fills them with fear so that they have only one route to peace — reconciliation.

God has given amazing grace and victories in these battles on board. Satan has lost so much power that when someone wants to say something that he knows will be contradicted, he looks around to see if he dares to say it in front of those present. Now and then when X is alone, he is in the fire, but when several of us come in, it’s as quiet as the grave. When God is with us, victory is in the air, and it makes our opposers unsure of themselves even before they open their mouths to fight. It’s not only that way among ungodly people, but also in the meetings. I have often been surprised by this, but that’s the way it is.

As far as feelings go, I feel wretched — sort of “couldn’t care less,” with nothing to assert, no honor to defend, no position to protect. I’m not worried about any group or “movement” getting a bad reputation because of me. This gives me much greater freedom and flexibility, so that when the battle begins I don’t need to take anyone’s flesh into consideration. The battle is ruthless and dreadful, but already in the heat of the battle, victory starts to glimmer, and all fleshly arguments must fall. It’s an awful position for the flesh to be in, but woe to me if I am not found faithful there. This is my testimony in the ministry. The Spirit, the water, and the blood can testify to this, even if it isn’t accepted by men.

We are going to stop at Vardø on the way out; we have to pick up the guards who are there. Brother Ellefsen knows almost all of Finnmark like a local. He knows the houses and the people. That’s because he is nearly always on the go, no matter what the weather is like.

Greet the brothers and sisters and everyone in your home.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Haugesund, January 26, 1918 — # 135


Dear Brother Aksel,

Thank you for your good letter with the letter enclosed, which I received today. It gives me great joy to read that sinners are being saved and believers sanctified in Drøbak. I can see that God has richly blessed the work on the east coast. Pauline wrote that brother Aslaksen has been in Horten; she said he spoke with tremendous wisdom and power.

In the course of the work, we encounter many new circumstances. In many of these circumstances, we have no previous experience, so we must be more eager than ever to listen to Him who speaks from heaven. Then we can find the right way and receive the blessing.

It is in the body (the church) and through the body that God can bless. If we separate ourselves from the body, then all we can accomplish is the performance of some religious duties. When the laws of the Spirit are broken, and contact with the Spirit is lost in vital areas, we will be unable to lead anyone to the blood of the covenant, to the veil, or to the altar, and the work cannot possibly succeed. We encounter many new situations, but the laws of the Spirit are not new to me. Although I am not experienced in all the detailed outworkings, I believe I understand the basic laws and the foundation they are based on.

Soon I will have been here on the west coast for four years, six months of which have been in Finnmark. No one else my age has been so far away for such a long time.

Things are going in a good, orderly way in the flock in Måløy. In Bergen we now have a foothold, since brother Madsen has become extremely open and humble.

Loving greetings to you, your wife, and the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

Johan





Haugesund, February 16, 1918 — # 136


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace!

Today, Saturday afternoon, the crew has had a “mending day.” I have the time off, and I had the urge to write something to Hortens avis [a local newspaper] about the tyranny of the rich, and how they have kept back the wages of the laborers. When the article was finished, I thought that it could be suitable for Skjulte Skatter, too. These are subjects that most people can easily relate to.

The work increases daily, yet it is a blessed work. I am thankful to God for His light and for His priceless knowledge. When this knowledge is applied in battle, it proves to be victorious.

We are working steadily and consistently here. I believe that the friends are becoming more and more united. They don’t say so much yet, but that can come later. These Bible studies have been very profitable for G., who will be going to the Hardanger fjord.

People everywhere are talking about Skjulte Skatter. They question it and struggle with it, but then light finally dawns. Then comes the battle with relatives and friends. That is the normal course of events.

Brother Ellefsen is very zealous. He gives himself to the work with all his soul. Let us work while it is day, for the night is coming when no one can work. What is written down on paper can be read over and over again many years from now. Skjulte Skatter is now working like capital in a bank. Many people have told me they have received light from it. Your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Greetings with love.

Your brother,

Johan





Haugesund, February 18, 1918 — # 137


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter. Things are happening everywhere.

The fact is that a whole lot of people who come to the meetings don’t enter into a deeper life; but they don’t leave, either. They like being among us. It wouldn’t be right to drive such people away. We have to let them keep coming, but we must see to it that they are kept in their place and are not allowed to have the slightest influence. Let the Holy of Holies remain the Holy of Holies, the Holy Place remain the Holy Place, and let the outer court remain the outer court; let it be known for what it is. In the long run, it is going to be absolutely impossible to avoid having a lot of people come among us from the outer court.

I wrote a letter to brother B., encouraging him to take care of the Lord’s outer court and not to chase them away. But everyone must be made aware that the Holy Place and the Holy of Holies are not in the outer court. I believe that will keep everything in its proper order: sinners will be saved, and the children of God will be sanctified, however the outer court must never be allowed to trample down the sanctuary.

The Scriptures teach us to choose those things which are humble. We mustn’t busy ourselves now with building in the heights. Let us rather concentrate on doing a thorough work in the depths. We will come to the heights soon enough. The important thing is that the foundation is solid. We must not try to fit every single person we have contact with into the building, but we must see to it that everyone is given a good, solid upbringing — a thorough education. If someone is active and wants to work, let him work; there will be time for his work to be tested. But we can’t just accept everything that everyone does as if it were all just fine. We must look at the fruits, and test the work in its entirety.

I am enclosing a letter from sister Hilda Broks. It looks like she has plenty to do. Now she is left there alone with an open door. Ask the brothers and sisters in Oslo and Drøbak to pray for her. She is a little reluctant to take the initiative, but I wrote and encouraged her to use the wisdom she has to handle the situation. If Aquila and Priscilla could explain the way of God more clearly to Apollos, then surely she can also explain the way of God more clearly to the ones there without giving the impression that she wants to be a lord or a teacher of men.

During lunch on board I have had some blessed meetings with a Navy ship’s carpenter. His name is Karl Martinsen. I have a great deal of faith for this dear brother.

God is working everywhere. The Word is active in all those who believe.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, May 24, 1918 — # 138


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace! I really appreciated the time we had together during the Pentecost conference in Drøbak. The meetings were very blessed, and I believe they will bear fruit for a long time to come. One of the sisters from Horten said she had left a whole lot of burdens behind in Drøbak. I hope that many others have done the same.

The two preachers, however, weren’t quite so satisfied with the conference. They couldn’t be in the limelight the way preachers are used to. When a person can find his rightful place, he can then advance from there; but when someone imagines himself to be something great and assumes a position accordingly, that is repulsive and exasperating to everyone who is of the truth and who loves the truth.

Everything that happened demonstrated that the friends have very good relationships with one another, and I believe that fellowship will be strengthened after this conference. A worldly expression says: “Unity gives strength.” But we can say: “Fellowship gives strength.” Many will come to faith when they see the fellowship we have. Oh, how Satan longs to drive wedges into this fellowship, so that unbelievers can be strengthened in their unbelief; but during this conference he was unsuccessful. God grant that this steel ring of Spirit, water, and blood may grow even stronger, so the enemy is unable to find a single weak point at which to make a successful attack. The strength of the fellowship among us can be seen from without. It is a strength that terrifies the ungodly and conquers everything in its path. Once this inner obedience is perfect, one can go further.

I’m enclosing two letters regarding the conference in Måløy. It is such a joy to hear how well it went. How good it is when God is allowed to guide and lead us in all things; then we have peace — deep peace. The Lord has worked with us in wonderful ways, and the development we have seen is wonderful. It is no wonder that the Lord is called “Wonderful.” From a handful of despised outcasts, there arises a whole new people, a mighty people — an obedient people.

Greet the brothers and sisters and your own family.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Mandal, November 4, 1918 — # 139


Dear Brother Aksel,

Peace!

We have just left Mandal and are steering westward in very high seas. I am going to Bergen and then over the mountains and back to Horten, probably on Wednesday. Because of mines, we had to spend last night in Kristiansand. A mine blew up in our stern wake during our approach to Kristiansand. The ship wasn’t scheduled to leave until 6:00 a.m., so I visited the brothers and sisters in the evening. They were happy for the unexpected visit. We spoke together until 1:00 a.m. in the morning. Afterward, I took a walk with one of the brothers. We walked the streets until 2:00 a.m. talking together about the ministry in Christ.

Brother Ellefsen is on board the Tordenskiold in Bergen. We should have almost a whole day in Bergen, so I hope to meet him. These trips are blessed.

I hope to be in Drammen Wednesday evening, God willing. If I could meet brother Thorleif Hansen, I would gladly travel via Oslo. We’ll see how it works out.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

Johan





Horten, January 4, 1919 — # 140


Dear Brother Aksel,

God’s perfect peace!

That was a wonderful time we had together in Drøbak between Christmas and the New Year! It was painful to see you so sick and weak. But God, who is mighty to strengthen you, will uphold you, just as things improved while we were together. I had some happy days together with the brothers and sisters in Drøbak — although the sorrow over your sickness weighed heavily on them all. We have now prayed for you in Horten, too.

I am enclosing a couple of letters. The one from Nils E. Fosse testifies to the help he has received from the paper. Now and then he goes out preaching God’s Word.

I want to hear as soon as possible how it is going. Loving greetings to you, to Helga, and to the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

Johan





This article is from the January, 1919 issue of Skjulte Skatter # 141


My and our highly esteemed brother and co-worker, Aksel Smith, died in faith in his beloved Savior Jesus Christ, Saturday the 18th. He was 38 years old.

What I and many others feel at the passing of our dear, faithful brother neither can nor will be described here. We will just tell a little about the end of his life, so that we may follow his faith. I visited Drøbak three times after Christmas. He became gradually weaker. We thought that he was going to be taken home on his 38th birthday, January 16. Young men and women, and older ones, too, whom he by the grace and power of God had been able to lead to Christ, knelt throughout the house, praying and weeping. We prayed that we would be able to keep him, but it pleased God to take him home.

On the morning of the 16th, the brothers and sisters stood around his bed. His half-closed eyes were glazed from constant sleeplessness, his face was deeply lined, and his voice was weak. In this atmosphere of heavy sorrow, he asked a sister to play a song on the piano, “Round About Jerusalem Are High Mountains.” At that moment, an unconverted woman fell to her knees at his bedside seeking salvation in Jesus Christ, and the brothers and sisters wept. Then he pointed to them one at a time and gave a loving and strikingly appropriate exhortation to each one. We were all amazed at how thoroughly and intimately he knew each one, and how clear his thoughts were so far into death. His wife asked him, “What do you want me to do when you’re gone?” He said, “Take up your cross.” A sister asked, “What is the best way I can express my thanks to you for what you have meant to me?” He answered, “By doing good wherever it is needed.”

He said to one, “Never depart from the temple of the Lord.” To another one, “Pray without ceasing.” To a third, “He who is faithful in that which is least is also faithful in that which is great. Tend the lambs.” Even young boys and girls were brought to his bedside. He had a word of exhortation and comfort for all of them, and they all went away from him weeping.

Around noon the same day the doctor arrived. Again a group of us stood around him. Aksel asked: “How long can this last — a couple of hours?” The doctor said there was not much hope, but he could not determine the time. Then Aksel pointed to his chest and said: “Here, within, I have an eternal life. I believe in Jesus Christ.” Then he asked a sister to play, “Like the Streams of the Southland, Homeward I’m Bound.” The doctor wept together with the rest of us. “Jesus is here, and the angels are all around me,” Aksel said. When I asked him if he had something to share with the brothers and sisters via Skjulte Skatter, he said, “Yes, receive the teachings that pertain to godliness; they work.” “Do you want me to greet the brothers and sisters in the paper?” “Yes.”

Due to my work, I had to leave Drøbak on the afternoon of the 17th. At that point, we still nurtured a tiny hope that God once more would turn the situation and spare his life, but that was not to be.

And so, the life of my dearly beloved brother has come to an end. In Drøbak where he lived the last four to five years of his life, a whole flock of young people mourn his passing. But we do not sorrow as those who have no hope. He has gone home to his Father and our Father. We shall see him again. He spoke repeatedly about the lambs in Drøbak and fervently impressed on our hearts the need to tend them, “because I love them,” he said. What he taught and wrote and battled for is recorded in Skjulte Skatter’s bound volumes from 1912 to the present. It was through his energetic work that we began publishing this little paper. Even though he had a weak body through all these years, he was able by the grace of God to make a deep and lasting impression. Much could be written about his life and work, but we will only mention these necessary things in order to shed light over the passing of this faithful servant of the Lord, so that we can follow his faith. Blessed be his memory, and blessed be the fruits of his labor. They shall remain, as he so often testified. One of the last things he spoke about to the brothers and sisters was that they must be diligent concerning obedience to the faith.

Loving greetings to all the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

Johan O. Smith





Letters - Part Two





Horten, April 13, 1911 — # 142


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace in Jesus Christ our Lord!

Thank you for your good postcard, from which we see that you are doing quite well. There is a way which leads forward into light and life. Blessed are all those who go this way. He who desires God’s light will first receive light over his own wretchedness, and then, from the filth of his wretchedness, gold can be mined. We need light in order to please God in our personal lives and our ministries, but in order to get light we must be looking for it. Some light goes unnoticed. Growth in the knowledge of Christ can only take place by the light and in the light. But it is impossible for light to shine into our hearts without bringing judgment with it. Therefore, with willing minds, we must agree with the light and agree with the judgment so that ultimately we can receive perfect judgment in Christ Jesus, because Jesus is also the way into judgment. May we be willing, dear brother, to go boldly forward on this amazing way which leads to such wonderful riches of light, wisdom, and the knowledge of God.

God, in His great grace, has given you a willing heart and placed within your soul the potential for both evil and good. Always choose the good so your riches in God can increase and your poverty according to the flesh can deepen. Then you will receive an abundance of God’s power. Life is short, so we need to make use of those elements which promote growth: sun, light, water, and air — or to put it in another way: the Spirit, the water, and the blood.

I’m sure you would find it interesting to talk to Mrs. Penn-Lewis, should God lead you in that way. If you have opportunity to speak with her, greet her in Christ Jesus from me. I have never met her, but I understand she has a great deal of light.

All of us here in Horten send you greetings. We always remember you in Christ Jesus, for love manifests itself and demands its rights at the expense of the flesh, which must suffer. May this fellowship in the Spirit, for which I thank God, always continue and deepen, to God’s glory. We have access to God in the same Spirit, whether we are apart or together.

Take 2 Timothy 4:1–6 to heart, and let us obey the counsel in Revelation 3:18.

Your devoted brother in Jesus,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 19, 1911 — # 143


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus!

Thank you for your very good letter. It was a joy for me and for all of us to hear from you and see that you are progressing in the knowledge of Christ. May we always, by God’s grace, abide in Him and grow in Him.

Yesterday we had a Bible study, where we talked together about the return of Christ and our union with Him, etc. 1 Corinthians 15, from verse 21 to the end of the chapter.

Since God has given you grace to dedicate yourself to His work, I believe that it would be profitable, both for yourself and others, that you diligently search out the ways of the inner life, by the Spirit of revelation in the knowledge of God — God’s Word. Most of those who have gone out as servants of Christ live before the face of man, so there is a great need for people who can take care of those things which God wants taken care of in the sanctuary. See Ezekiel 44, from verse 15.

Though this inner ministry goes on unseen by men’s eyes, it is highly esteemed by God, before whose judgment seat we shall stand and from whom we shall receive our reward. All outward progress comes from within. Why not, then, remain there and be content in that ministry? Our goal is not an external glory, but rather to be in Christ Jesus, bearing His reproach. Over everything glorious there is a covering, and the more glorious the thing that is hidden, the more unsightly the covering. But the carnal eye sees only the surface; it is quite blind to the treasure hidden beneath. You find one here and one there who is taking the kingdom of heaven by force, but there are not many.

Thank you for your comforting words, which were full of knowledge and understanding. May God reward you above and beyond what I can express. True understanding is the reward of love; it has the effect of a word in season. May God find us faithful in our ministry. Then, when we are misunderstood and spoken evil of, we can gladly sacrifice it on the altar of Christ’s sufferings. For “if indeed we suffer with Him, we also will be glorified together.”

Don’t let any professor of theology rob you of the simplicity which is in Christ, for in this simplicity lies the power to overthrow the wise and their wisdom. Lowliness rooted in God is stronger than the might of men. Let us be on guard against all defilement of flesh or spirit, so that we are never overcome by anyone — except the truth itself.

Loving greetings from all of us here. Your devoted brother in Christ,

J. O. Smith





Horten, September 17, 1911 — # 144


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace!

Heartfelt thanks for your good letter and for your greetings through Aksel’s letter. God is with us here. The work does not proceed quickly, but it is going steadily and surely forward.

Yesterday, we talked about different things a servant in the church must bear in mind when dealing with those who seek his advice and who have gained confidence in him in Christ Jesus. We must show unwavering firmness toward such people, and never show them our own weak areas. We need to show our weaknesses to God and to people who are able to bear them.

Our goal is Colossians 1:28: “Him we preach, warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.”

Because this verse is not practiced, the last part of Matthew 5:13 is fulfilled. The salt loses its power[Norw.]; it is good for nothing but to be thrown out and trampled underfoot by men. As a result, a person becomes useless to God’s people — his words have no effect because he has no power. Neither is he of any use to the people of the world, because being half-religious he has no power to rebuke them. He is like salt that is trampled underfoot — the most miserable and useless state a person can come into in this world. And yet the majority of so-called believers are salt without power, and the world regards them with contempt.

If we preach and teach Christ from beginning to end as Paul described in 1 Thessalonians 1:5, we have the hope of presenting a pure virgin to Christ. This was the goal of all Paul’s efforts.

Dear brother, God has blessed you richly because you have acknowledged the truth that leads to godliness. May the goal and effort of your service always be to present a “chaste virgin to Christ.” Not just a virgin who is chaste because of ignorance, but a “consciously” chaste virgin, filled with God’s knowledge, for this is the “enlightened, intelligent” virgin Christ desires.

Servants who aim for such high goals are sorely needed. Do not set low goals for yourself, but set them high and you will attain great things. I don’t mean to contradict the verse which says: “Do not set your mind on high things, but keep gladly to what is lowly.” [Norw.] It is precisely by seeking what is lowly that we attain to what is great. He who neglects that which is lowly will never reach that which is great, because God does not permit any “skipping over.”

I am looking forward to seeing you and Aksel here before you leave. We plan to have a little feast for the occasion — God willing.

I received Aksel’s letter yesterday afternoon, and it was a blessing to read about the progress down in Denmark — the language of Canaan on the lips of Danes.

Receive the exhortation in 1 Timothy 4:16 as from the Lord — and for Aksel, what is written in Jeremiah 1:17.

Hearty brotherly greetings.

Yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 2, 1911 — # 145


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace from God through Jesus Christ our Lord!

Hearty thanks for your good letter from Oslo.

God has blessed your work, and I believe He will continue to do so. Just be faithful to Him in everything. God has given you light; use it to battle and conquer. Never allow anyone to dominate you or control you — except the truth itself. Never be subservient to people who don’t serve our Lord Jesus Christ. Never fear the people around you. If they love God, you will have fellowship with them, but if they don’t love Him, don’t let them get too close. Keep them at a distance, because you never know when they will turn and attack you. Sell everything you have, buy a sword, and practice using it lawfully. I know you love the truth with your whole heart, but as you know, we can’t be warned and admonished enough about all the wretchedness and corruption in the world. It can snare a soul and steal his power.

Heartfelt greetings. Your devoted brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 26, 1911 — # 146


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Thank you so much for the time we had together. Your progress in our Lord Jesus Christ and your zeal for Him and for His kingdom has been a great comfort and encouragement to all of us. Your work in Him has not been in vain. God has richly blessed you both with knowledge and with the insight of wisdom, so you must not be afraid to give instruction by yourself when Aksel is not able to be there. Teaching others will also be a good education for you, and your most essential work in the Lord will most probably be as a teacher — with your face set toward Jerusalem. Work on this, dear brother, and don’t let your youth hinder you in the work which older brothers should have taken up. Do not allow anyone who is older to despise you for this, as Paul exhorted Timothy in 1 Timothy 4:12. For those who are older are not always elders. Neither are the young always the youngest. Wisdom which is not withheld, coupled with understanding, is the right old age. Therefore, begin working — the sooner the better — with these Bible studies so the number of those who are bearing their cross can grow. Concentrate all your strength on this holy, purposeful work, and in the end it will become your crown, your glory, and your honor. If we set our sights high, we will reach a high goal. But this can only be attained by choosing those things which are lowly and those things that are not highly esteemed, for over everything glorious there lies a covering. The Holy Spirit shows us the way to true happiness; its reliability is confirmed by the Word of God.

The way to unhappiness is abundantly publicized on every street corner, and every surrender to the desires of the flesh confirms it.

Greet Aksel. Hearty greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 14, 1912 — # 147


My dear Brother Aslaksen,

with whom I am deeply united in our Savior, Jesus Christ, who called us out of darkness and into His marvelous light.

Thank you for your very good letter. It is always a great joy to hear from you and to sense your love in the Spirit. May God reward you for your great faithfulness and give you grace to constantly live before His face and to always bring forth spiritual food from His table. We must close our eyes and ears to outward things and open the eyes and ears of our heart. In that way, we learn to discern between the noble and the ignoble.

Aksel was here last Sunday, and we had a wonderful conversation about testing — not the words, but the spirits.

Thank you for the exhortations in Ezekiel 28:17 and Isaiah 4:5. They are well worth taking to heart. Personally, I wish I could be by myself way up in the attic, and just sit and listen to my precious Lord and Master’s voice. All my heart and mind are devoted to hearing that voice in the midst of the busyness of life. Pray for me that God will guide my way through life — especially now concerning the choice between civil employment or a permanent position in the Navy — so that everything can take place to God’s honor and for my true benefit, and so that I can come even closer to the goal God has set for me.

It’s now 8:30 in the morning. Soon I have to go to the office, so I’ll close with hearty greetings from your brother, increasingly united in the blood and in love,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 27, 1912 — # 148


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Thank you for your very good letter.

You say that the weapons of our spiritual warfare can all be summed up in one thing: simple faithfulness to Christ. Yes, that is true. In simple faithfulness we can find a deep rest from which difficulties and evil powers must flee. Thus simplicity and wisdom are united, which the world cannot combine. But for God it is possible. Things that seem to be overwhelming and insurmountable are easily overcome if we always live in humility before the Lord’s face.

We live in quietness. It seems to me that we are becoming more and more removed from it all. We are quite happy with that, as long as we can just devote ourselves to Him who can satisfy our hearts and instruct us in His law.

It is a joy to me that you have held on to what you received from the beginning — the faithful Word that can make us wise unto salvation and which is able to lead us by the light of the Spirit to the boundless treasures that are in Christ. Yet we know there is a covering over everything glorious, so the things that are glorious will not be regarded as glorious until we are revealed together with Him in glory.

God values “faithfulness in the wilderness” very highly. A soul that is overwhelmed with grace cannot help but be faithful, but faithfulness in temptations and in all kinds of adversities is very precious to God.

We also need to take this to heart: if we seek to please men we cannot be servants of Christ. If we are faithful, our body becomes a sacrifice, and it suffers with Christ. But if it suffers, it also shares in the promise of being glorified with Him — not only the body but the whole man: body, soul, and spirit.

The baptism of the Holy Spirit, which can be called the baptism of grace, will by the baptism of fire, permeate us with the baptism of righteousness; for what is baptized with grace is kept for fire. The fire restores that relationship of favor that God had intended for mankind. He who receives grace is held captive in grace in order that the fire can do its work. Grace itself is not the goal. The ultimate goal is righteousness and truth. The baptism of the Spirit is the seal we receive in order to be dealt with further by the same God, who will hereafter be a consuming fire in our lives.

God can baptize us with the Spirit because He was able to satisfy His zeal upon Christ. But His zeal for us in the Beloved remains to be accomplished by the fire: fellowship with Christ in His sufferings.

Greetings from all of us here.

Yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 18, 1912 — # 149


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus our Lord!

Thank you for your good letter. I always rejoice to see and experience your zeal, which God will reward by giving you deeper and fuller acknowledgment in your life. My desire is that you, by God’s grace, may weave a large crown of living souls which will be an adornment for you at the revelation of Jesus Christ our Lord.

You wrote about the church — how it can grow and flourish. May God bring forth living churches for Himself in every place. However, God needs the life and work of an apostle as a tool in His hand in order to raise up churches. Once a church has been brought forth, it will remain and develop through the mutual help that each member supplies according to his apportioned measure.

I wrote a letter to Aksel and asked him to let you read it; but since you left Oslo so quickly, you probably haven’t seen it. God, in His grace, gave me something to write concerning the light. I will repeat it here so that you can consider it and put into practice whatever help you may receive from it. It was only a short letter, but nonetheless it was a glorious revelation which is profitable for us in our present situation. God is good; His mercy endures forever.

If we follow the light (the light God gives) and ruthlessly enforce everything that we see by it on the others, we will become tyrants — spiritual tyrants. The light is to be our co-worker. In the light we are to see and understand how to handle matters. We are children of the day and not of the night. Our faithfulness will be tried according to the wisdom by which we carry out our work in the light. In the light, we can see many things that are not right, but God does not require us to take the responsibility for correcting all this. We must deal with situations in all spiritual wisdom and understanding. The light will help us in this so that we are able to see the situations from different viewpoints.

The revelation of the Spirit is given for the common good, and I believe that this revelation of the truth is quite fitting just now.

Be a true fisher of men who understands to use the right means. Loving greetings from your brother, striving together with you in the service of Christ,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 17, 1912 — # 150


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Thank you very much for your letter I received a while ago. It is now on its way to America together with your photograph. I did that in order to introduce you to some brothers and sisters over there who write to me often; then, if God one day leads your path over there, they will know who you are. We are very glad to hear that you have found an open door in Hønefoss. It is blessed to work in the Lord’s vineyard. Everything that has happened shows that God is working together with us. I am happy that you are so apprehended of Christ that you see fit to work in lowly places, so that some will, and others can, stumble over that work. To keep oneself in the low places is a mystery of Christ which undermines all the religious confusion which is so prevalent now — and that confusion must be undermined. Everything is desolate; it is an opportune time, and we need to work. Maybe you could come down on Pentecost weekend. There is a lot we could talk about together now. One brother told me that as soon as his eyes were opened to this life, he felt a tremendous conflict within, which he said was from the devil, and he prayed that God would take it away. No doubt there are quite a few others who think the same thing when God sends His cleansing fire over them. Perhaps you, too, will meet people like this on your way. Then it is best if they reveal the cause of their conflict to you so you can quickly understand what is happening. God wants to train servants, and these must first be tested to see if they are faithful. Others have impurities which must be cleansed out, etc.

It will be interesting to hear from you. Hearty greetings from all of us here.

Your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 9, 1912 — # 151


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s grace and peace in Christ Jesus!

Thank you for your good letter. Your wedding day is fast approaching, which for a bride of Christ ought to be a day observed in all simplicity. Rest in God will guide everything in that direction, for all commotion and “show” is of and from the flesh.

Regarding raffles and that sort of thing, we have stopped having them here because it has not been as pure as it ought to be. Better to have less with purity.

Be free from everything and everyone, for the Lord will take care of you. I say this with regard to the situation in Hønefoss. Retain the authority you have received from God, and don’t allow any gift-giver to rob you of your rightful authority to chasten when chastening is necessary. You are now in a position in which God requires tremendous faithfulness; you must not show partiality to anyone nor allow yourself to be corrupted by gifts. I write these things, not because you are unaware of them, but to remind you of them so that God can accomplish as much as possible by your hand.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother in Jesus Christ,

J. O. Smith





Horten, July 16, 1912 — # 152


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Thank you for the postcard.

God has given you a “flying start,” dear brother, and if you faithfully care for those things God wants cared for, then your future is secure. The leaven is working mightily in many places. But just as leaven grows particle by particle, so this work also must be transmitted from person to person.

Now we have a time to work like we have never had before. Use the time, dear brother, and you will see a rich reward for your labor. I’ve never doubted that you make good use of the time, but I believe that God also wants to use you elsewhere. I think you’ve done right in nurturing the brothers and sisters in Hønefoss so that they become established; but now that traveling has become so easy, both by land and by sea, you can take short trips and come home again very quickly.

Aksel is in Kristiansand now. He intends to use the time for writing. He has sent in several subscriptions for the paper. God has given Skjulte Skatter a rich entrance, and I believe that He will continue to bless it. In this day and age when people generally have no aim for their labor, we must always work with a purpose.

Those who have received the baptism of the Spirit but have not entered into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings must now allow themselves to be persuaded, otherwise it will end in disaster, since all the food in their pastures was eaten up long ago.

Greetings to your wife. Greet the brothers and sisters with 1 Peter 5:6–12. Read Exodus 32:25 for yourself, and see the context in which it is written. You can see that faithfulness and decisiveness must be exercised.

I greet you heartily with Psalm 5:3.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 17, 1913 — # 153


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your good letter. It has been a source of great joy. I read it to the brothers and sent it on to T., who also needed some wind in his sails.

Dear brother, it is not how young or old you are that matters. Understanding is the true indication of maturity in the assembly of the wise. There are many older brothers in S. It is difficult to work with them, since they would like to bring along some of their old doctrines (leaven). We have to get all the old pumped out of them and make “doctrines” according to the flesh disgusting to them.

Once people receive the Word and the Word begins to grow, the weeds also start growing. If you are to be faithful, you must tear these weeds out by the roots unmercifully. There must be no respect of persons here; you must put your reputation, your position, your all on the line. Unfaithfulness in this area gives Satan victory. If you constantly exercise yourself in this, it will become your nature. Put aside controversial questions concerning baptism, religious training for children, etc., in order to concentrate on the more essential things. First and foremost, we must teach people to be godly, to be separate, to take up their cross, and do battle. They must learn to overcome cowardice; they must learn to think for themselves. Teach them to be awake, and if you can’t teach them to be awake, you have to shake them up. Anyone who wants to exalt himself and has tendencies in that direction must get the feeling that he is constantly being watched. He must never feel secure in that condition. Such people are too cowardly to attack directly those whom God uses, but they will try to devour the poor souls you are trying to work with.

You once wrote something to the effect that it is vain to work outside of the church, and that every work that is done must be done with the church in mind. I agree wholeheartedly. God has given you grace; don’t let anything go by unnoticed. Let us avoid petty matters and concentrate our energies on things that are essential. There is strength in unity — not least, unity in the Spirit.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 2, 1913 — # 154


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your postcard. I see that some have taken to their heels. Whenever someone preaches about purifying the heart, it’s the same old story: either they go and cleanse themselves or they harden themselves. People have to respond to God’s Word in one of these two ways. We can’t do anything about this. It is a great joy to us all that you minister as unto God. As to the results, we can only leave that to God. Many times almost everyone in Horten left us, but God sent back those who were really interested. Naturally, as far as it depends on us, we ought to use the fishing method instead of forcing the truth on people. But if it is not up to us, then God’s will be done, even if we preach the house empty. Let it have its effect either one way or the other. God is with us, dear brother; fear not. He will give grace and victory in the end.

I suppose Aksel is in Sarpsborg now and that he will say something about the Easter conference we’re planning to have in Porsgrunn.

Greetings to the brothers. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 13, 1913 — # 155


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus!

Aksel telephoned yesterday to let me know that he can’t find any place better than Horten to have an Easter conference, so we will do what we can to make preparations here.

We are not rich people here in Horten, so everyone must be prepared to take care of himself. If there are some who cannot come for financial reasons, then the brothers and sisters from their home church will have to help them out, or they will just have to stay home. For that matter, we do not come together to pamper the body, but to hear God’s Word. If people have a clear understanding of why we come together, we will avoid many illusions, disappointments, offenses, etc. — things which should be crushed before they see the light of day.

I am not writing this to prevent any of the brothers and sisters from coming to the conference. I just want to bring everything down to reality so we can face the facts; then everyone can come prepared.

We live in hard times, so if everyone is going to practice righteousness, everyone must be as considerate as possible. This will promote brotherly love rather than weaken it, because demands on others will be eliminated, and people will be stirred up to give instead. This also applies to Horten.

Loving greetings.

Yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 12, 1914 — # 156


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Beloved in Christ Jesus!

Thank you for your very good letter. It is always a great joy to read your letters and see your love, which is made manifest through your care for the sheep God has given you grace to bear and to guide. May God always preserve you in this noble relationship and give you strength to bear and to endure, so that with respect to responsibility and strength, you may become a pillar in God’s temple. What more could we wish to attain here in this world than to be God’s co-worker? God is faithful in His work; let us also be faithful as His co-workers. Truly I understand more and more that anything that is not coupled with wisdom is useless.

May God grant that in our prayers we are preserved in attentiveness and in the acknowledgment of His chastening, so that the knowledge and insight of God can gain place in our lives. For what does it help to pray night and day if we only pray to consume it upon our lusts? God wants us to pray and to receive, and to retain what we’ve received. The things we retain equip us to serve God. But if we pray in order to use what we receive to gain honor and prestige, we consume it upon our fleshly lusts. If we pray and retain what we receive, then even God’s gift is a cross — a cross that only His most intimate and faithful followers are granted to bear.

It becomes clearer and clearer that life in God is hidden. There is no better way for it to be revealed than through the knowledge of God in the Spirit. By this knowledge we understand that, for the growth of the body, the way of life upward is contingent upon the way of death downward. Those who are “without,” God shall judge. Their judgment is that they will be gathered as enemies into a footstool under Christ’s feet until such time as the fullness of this enmity — the devil’s masterpiece, the Antichrist — is incarnated as the actual footstool at the feet of Jesus. Christ will then destroy him at the revelation of His coming. Christ was the embodiment of God; Antichrist will be the embodiment of Satan. Every thought and every action leads to the embodiment of either one or the other.

May God keep us humble, attentive, vigilant and mindful of His chastening, desiring to be filled with Him in whom all the fullness of God dwells. Aksel was here yesterday.

Greetings in the love of Christ to you and all the others.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 21, 1914 — # 157


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s precious peace!

Heartfelt thanks for your letter which I received today. The letter from sister R. was one of the best I have ever read from a woman. May God give her abundant grace and power over there in America. During a conference here, I realized that she was filled with the spirit of zeal. That’s the sort of people that are needed. We need that aggressive, unyielding spirit of Joshua and Caleb to win territory in Canaan from all the mighty giants. It’s a shame, but a number of brothers and sisters who have heard the word of truth are more like the great multitude who murmured and rebelled against Joshua and Caleb, and who became discouraged and timid. We must never view difficulties as something that cannot be overcome. We must regard them for what they are, then reckon with God’s power, and in the name of the Lord Sabaoth, attack.

God has given us victory so far, dear brother, and we will continue to overcome. Our part is to keep His Word exactly and obey His commandments (read Deuteronomy 8, from verse 7); herein lies the hidden power for victory. This is the mystery of godliness — God manifested in flesh. And who can stand before Him? May we zealously prepare ourselves, always keeping this goal in mind.

Aksel sent you two letters that were intended for him. We are members of one another, and since we are all different, we cannot write to the one as we do to another. So I am sure you can understand that I could not and would not write to you the way I write to Aksel. But since our goal is always godliness and self-denial, everything will be considered pure and be rightly understood by those who are pure. So I am very happy to see that you have taken it as something that can stir up your sincere mind, not as something that should be interpreted in any other way.

A while ago, I attended a meeting out of town. If there is such a thing as “spiritual confusion,” that would have to be it. They prayed about anything and everything with no conscious direction or understanding. When I came back to Horten I passed by brother Karl Pedersen’s open window and heard the brothers and sisters gathered there, and my heart was filled with joy. There you can breathe freely, speak freely, and be understood.

I have applied for and received a two-week leave of absence to go to Kristiansand. On Thursday I’ll leave for Drøbak, where Aksel is now practicing dentistry. From there I’ll take the night train west after I speak with the brothers. I may stop off in Grimstad and spend the evening there to talk with the brothers and sisters. Pray that God will give me grace to proclaim His Word in the right way.

Greet the brothers and sisters and your family.

Loving greetings,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 3, 1914 — # 158


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

The conference that we just had was essential. Brother Ellefsen and brother Skiaker were there, as well as most of the brothers and sisters from Horten. Brother Skiaker has made remarkable progress; he participated zealously. God blessed the meetings, which were marked by a deep peace.

X is a remarkable place. There is much of the form of godliness there, but little power. The spirit of vanity, in particular, rules there. I think the only way to get rid of this spirit is by thoroughly exposing it. The women, in particular, are severely affected. It takes patience and battle to bring conviction of sin and lead souls through this chaos down to the foundation — the hard, solid rock.

We have spoken much here recently about the law of death. The law of sin leads people into the law of death. The iron fetters of Satan’s powers bind the ungodly to this law of death. Their conscience is dead. The law of sin leads to the law of death. Every time a person is disobedient to the will of God, a conception takes place in the flesh, and sin is born. One gradually dies in trespasses and sins.

On the other hand, when a person is obedient and does the works of faith, a spiritual conception takes place, and life is born — the life of Christ. See Romans 8:2. Faith without works is dead; but when it is united with works, a life is born. This life is Christ manifested in flesh, or Christ in you, the hope of glory. Once faith has given birth to works, a righteous life follows. There is hope for this life. Here lies the difference between faith and hope. I am glad that you and brother Thorleif Hansen are in Kristiansand. May God bless your work. Greet those at home. Greet brother Hansen. Greet all the brothers and sisters. On Sunday, June 14, some are coming here from Oslo and Drøbak. Some want to be baptized. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Horten, July 17, 1914 — # 159


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

I see from Aksel’s letter that you are coming to Kristiansand from Denmark. A person’s spiritual state can be said to be constant; it determines how much spiritual strength that individual has. This state is not something that can be exhorted or faulted; it is the life and power that one has gained. On the other hand, we, as conscious beings, can be praised or faulted, all according to how and whether we choose either death or life while in this mortal flesh.

Likewise, the body of sin cannot be attacked; but the old man can be kept crucified, and then the body of sin will be destroyed. Where sin in the body is perfectly united with the mind, “the man of sin” comes into being (the Antichrist). But where the will of God was accomplished by faith in every respect, Christ came into being, in whom the whole fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily.

It is absolutely necessary to suffer and be comforted in order to be able to comfort others, for the soul that suffers in order to walk in the truth and in obedience can never be comforted by anything other than that comfort with which another has been comforted under the same circumstances. A doctrine about comfort is hollow. It only heightens the pain and increases the separation.

We should not seek comfort for comfort’s sake, but for the sake of our weakness, so that we don’t utterly perish in the fire. God does His greatest work where no comfort is given. But who has attained to such a degree of weakness that death is a comfort?

The ideal thing is to receive the truth without grace; but when grace is not in vain, its comfort will uphold us until death, in order that this “state” of ours can develop as we live, and the body of sin can be replaced by the life of Christ. If this interaction of grace and truth were to be distorted, the person would only harden his heart, and salvation would not be perfect. Yet, what is grace but God’s longsuffering? For all those for whom grace has labored in vain, this longsuffering will come to an end on the day of vengeance; for, where grace labors in vain, vengeance surely will not be in vain.

Therefore, let our course not be in vain, lest we be overtaken by vengeance; for both grace and vengeance come from one and the same Lord, and both shall overtake those to whom they are sent.

Let us replenish our spiritual being moment by moment, for in this the real substance or value of our lives and the reward for our efforts are preserved.

Life on board is a tribulation, humanly speaking, but it has nonetheless been of great blessing to me. God is faithful. He does a work in hearts so that each and every person makes his own unique contribution to our spiritual education.

Hearty greetings in the fellowship of the Spirit to both Aksel and yourself.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Trondheim, October 5, 1914 — # 160


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Hearty thanks for your letter and card. We are berthed in Trondheim now, and will remain here until the 15th of this month. Karl Pedersen is at Fort Oscarsborg and often visits Aksel and the other brothers and sisters in Drøbak.

They enjoy Skjulte Skatter here in Trondheim, and because of the paper, people soon knew who I was.

Now, while God is working and the flock is increasing, we must hold unshakably fast to what we have insisted on right from the beginning as the basis for fellowship — namely, purity. We — you as well as the rest of us who have been along from the beginning — all bear this responsibility. You know how easily things degenerate into common religiosity, only to end up as a dead assembly. It is not the multitude that gains the victory, but personal godliness. Better one godly brother than a hundred who are unreliable. May this be our guideline in the future! This vigilance must come from the core of the church; the periphery is incapable of such a task. I know full well that you began practicing these things and speaking about them long ago, but it can still be necessary to remind one another of them so that we can watch together.

God recognizes and blesses honest work. When we strive to show longsuffering, patience, and mercy to one another, brotherly love will increase and the fellowship will be strengthened.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Greet Judith.

Loving greetings,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Haugsholmen, January 5, 1915 — # 161


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

We should remember how Jesus asked Peter three times if he loved Him. Each time he received a new commandment to feed His lambs, watch His sheep, and feed them. We have received the same ministry, each according to his own measure. So let us not neglect these lambs and sheep in order to fish sinners from the streets and highways. If we can manage both, well and good. But we must never let the Lord’s lambs and sheep suffer neglect because of our preoccupation with a ministry that is largely outward and that has been primarily entrusted to others.

Let us not in this way covet the honor of having the reputation that God is with us. Let people believe what they want, even if they believe that God despises us. Let us simply carry out our duty with patient endurance. In the long run, it will become apparent whether we have done our work in faithfulness. Many years can easily be spent working with one soul, for it takes a long time to be perfected in the work of ministry.

Brotherly greetings in the love of Christ.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Ålesund, March 16, 1915 — # 162


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Father died during the night between the 1st and 2nd of March. His last words were: “I want to be more filled with Him who is the way, the truth, and the life.” May God bless his spirit and his work. There is a grief in my heart over Father’s death, but by God’s grace we will meet again in a better home — the eternal dwelling place. Father loved his Lord and Master; he was the one who taught us that the world is utter emptiness without God. His joy was to be seated together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and now he is at home with the Lord, where we shall meet again. May we all prepare ourselves, as never before, to meet our God.

Our time on earth is short. May we use it well — may we hear His voice and do His will. “If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit.” Galatians 5:25. This verse has been of great comfort to me, because it is this walk in the Spirit that we have preached all these years — often with great opposition. Since the Scriptures speak about walking in the Spirit, there must be a way for us to walk upon. The Spirit only acknowledges one way, the new and living way — Jesus Christ. This is the way of death for all flesh, so that the life of Christ can be manifested in our mortal flesh.

We must go forward, always forward, never stopping, living only in the Spirit — always walking in the Spirit. Spirit, water, and blood; Spirit, water and blood, as long as we are at home in the body. The battlefield is not a place of rest — though we are always entering into a deeper rest. While we are in the body, there is the potential for growth of the body, and we need to follow Jesus’ counsel to force our way into the kingdom of heaven. I don’t know of any other way, and I don’t want any other way. It was for this purpose Paul was chosen as an apostle to bring about obedience to the faith among all the nations for His name. Romans 1:5.

It has been and continues to be the longing of my heart to preach obedience to the faith; for I know that this is the secret and the source of absolutely all spiritual growth and blessing. I cannot just live in the Spirit and rejoice over all the glory. That would be unfaithfulness. May God give me and all of us, to whom the Lord has given light, grace always to press ahead — constantly forward, as long as we are in the body and can continue in acknowledgment. Later, when the body returns to the dust, we will no longer be able to walk in the Spirit; but then we shall live in the Spirit and rejoice over what we have won while we were here in the body. This is my light concerning our life down here, and I believe that everyone who has God’s Spirit has the same testimony, if he will listen to what the Spirit says in the church. By God’s grace, I can only exhort myself and as many as are willing and able to listen: Forward, forward, constantly forward. There is no time to lose; time is passing so very quickly. Let us fear God in all things and be cleansed from all filthiness, both of flesh and spirit. Soon the battle will be over, and we shall be rewarded according to what has taken place in the body.

I rejoice to see and experience your zeal and love for the truth and for all the saints. God shall reward everyone according to his works on that day. In the world we have — and must have — tribulations, but in Him we have peace, precious peace — a peace which the world cannot take away from us. On the other hand, we can take away the world’s peace with the sword of the Spirit, which is God’s Word.

A few days ago I received a letter from brother Thorleif Hansen in Oslo. He is now engaged to be married. He is a very truth-loving man. May God give him great grace in his battle against sin. It is a life and death battle to resist sin unto blood, but by God’s power it shall succeed.

We had some meetings in Måløy, and there was a full house. But when I understood that they only wanted me to be their pastor, I invited the believers to get together to talk about it. It very quickly became evident that they didn’t understand anything, and the flock immediately became smaller. We can guide and teach, but they must live the life themselves.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Odda in Hardanger, April 21, 1915 — # 163


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

There’s much to do and many things to put right among the people of God. This work requires love, self-sacrifice, self-denial, understanding, impartiality, and the insight of wisdom; and one must have the ability to make judgments in different situations. The question arises: Who is sufficient for these things? Such a person must not act according to his own human tendencies; he must be as Sirach says: “As the fat is taken away from the peace offering, so was David chosen out of the children of Israel.”

While here in the body, we have a lot to learn so that we don’t pamper the body but present it as a living sacrifice, acceptable to God. It is here that God’s manifold wisdom is revealed through the manifold sacrifices that are required of a priest who is zealous for God in His service.

In the kingdom of God the great victories are won by being faithful in the small details of life, and it is this faithfulness that will tear down the religious lawlessness and indifference of our times. We must attack determinedly in this battle, for God Himself has placed the keys of knowledge in our hands and given us the power to cast down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God. Our task is not to patch up the old, but to preach God’s Word in all its sharpness so that it can bring forth a mighty people who can proclaim His praises.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Haugsholmen, April 1, 1916 — # 164


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your good letter. I’m glad to see that you are doing well. I have read your article about freedom and bondage. Brother Thorleif Hansen wrote to me about the lack of clarity that prevails concerning freedom and bondage. I have sent him an answer concerning this, and tomorrow I’m sending a little article to Skjulte Skatter about it. I see that you have clarity in this area, and every spiritual man ought to have clarity here. But it is true, as you wrote, that if a person wants to leave because it is too hard, he will always find some pretext for leaving. The important thing for us in all this is to stand together having one heart, one mind, one vision, and one goal.

There is no value in dressing up beyond what is seemly, nor is there any value in dressing so plainly that we draw attention to ourselves in that way. To just disappear in the crowd is undoubtedly the greatest cross for the flesh, which seeks gratification from adornment as well as from lack of adornment. Such questions come up mostly among women, and they are usually the ones who speak about bondage. I believe that the doctrines which God by His grace has given us to preach are of such a nature that they will save us from both bondage to the flesh and freedom for the flesh, because the preaching always points people toward suffering and death. So I have not given much consideration to all the vain furor that is going on about the issue of bondage. All of it is probably coming from some vain women who think it is bondage to dress simply. These people shouldn’t be supported but rather chastised. Perhaps then they will have second thoughts. They only want to draw attention to themselves in one way or another to satisfy their flesh. I have attempted to explain some of this in my article to Skjulte Skatter.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Haugesund, October 17, 1916 — # 165


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter. “I, therefore, the prisoner of the Lord, beseech you to walk worthy of the calling with which you were called, with all lowliness and gentleness…” Ephesians 4:1.

Each one of us has his own unique and peculiar calling within the body. The intention is that we keep ourselves pure in our own area, there to grow and develop. I’ve often noticed that among the brothers these things are not fully understood. Without being consciously aware of it, one’s flesh can become puffed up to a certain extent, with the result that one feels competent enough and wise enough to intervene in the calling and work of others — free to step in and make radical changes. I’ve been up against this foolishness time and time again. Knowledge puffs up, but love builds up. You young ones are strong, it is written, but we pray that you may become perfect. 2 Corinthians 13:9.

We see in part and prophesy in part. It is possible to pound the table in the strength of one’s youth, believing that one is not afraid to tell anyone the truth. This sounds daring, courageous, and fearless, because the little bit that one knows, one shares. But when that which is perfect has come, then that which is in part will be done away with. Likewise, when the things we see in part serve as links to that which is perfect, the pieces disappear in the whole. In their zeal for the truth, people think they can keep their little portion all to themselves, but this just won’t work. Everything must be sacrificed for the sake of the whole. Strength is fine, but when it works against the uniting of all the parts into a composite whole, then this strength, however strong it seems to be, will be broken by the power of God — which is revealed in those who are weak.

I have recently met some people who are strong in the name of zeal, so I want to point this out, because it is easy to become conceited in one’s own strength. It is very risky to presume that one is strong enough to evaluate those who are fathers in Christ and barge one’s way into their work! I’m afraid that those who do that are opposing God in their high-mindedness. But how true it is: “Though you might have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet you do not have many fathers.” I have praised brothers who really weren’t mature enough to receive such praise. If my confidence in them has been excessive, I will hereafter seek that which is more perfect, so that as far as possible I might speak the truth in everything. For I am hardly exaggerating when I say that within my limitations in Christ, and within the scope of my allotted ministry, I have sensed in the spirit some rebelliousness. But, by God’s power — that measure of power given to me by God — this rebellion has repeatedly been brought to silence. These troublemakers are welcome to continue their onslaught against me personally; after all, what is man? But what I fear is that by taking upon themselves the role of teachers, they are exceeding the bounds of their calling. Perhaps some must be broken down in this way in order to become truly weak; but I doubt it, because the way of humility that leads to weakness is plainly shown in the Scriptures.

You find more than enough light at the poles, but still nothing grows there, because of the lack of warmth. It’s easy to hammer away at people with the truth, but it will only be to one’s own detriment if the grace that always accompanies the truth of Christ is not present in what one says. Knowledge without love is sounding brass and a tinkling cymbal. The doctrine of Christ tells us that those members which are “less honorable” shall be given greater honor. If we act accordingly, all envy disappears.

John came to turn the hearts of the fathers to the children and the hearts of the children to the fathers. The spirit that seeks to draw the children’s hearts away from the fathers is of Satan.

In Zion God has laid a stone of stumbling. I have written this to you because you need to know about it. Things can be done in the course of one’s ministry that not everyone can grasp right away. But if it cannot be understood except after repeated and lengthy explanations, then any hasty, premature judgment will only be after the flesh.

Dear brother, your care for the church has been a great joy both to me and to the others. Convey my greetings to your family and to the beloved brethren in Hønefoss.

Your fellow servant in the Lord’s warfare,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Ålesund, January 16, 1917 — # 166


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter and for the time I spent in your home on the 12th and 13th. We had a meeting in the evening, and your mother gave quite a good testimony.

“Let your women keep silent in the churches, for they are not permitted to speak; but they are to be submissive, as the law also says.” 1 Corinthians 14:34. The same apostle tells us that every woman who has her head uncovered while praying or prophesying disgraces her head. 1 Corinthians 11:5. Furthermore, he says that the one who prophesies edifies the church and speaks edification, exhortation, and comfort to men. 1 Corinthians 14:3–4.

I have to assume that the words “keep silent” mean to keep silent with respect to unprofitable questions, old wives’ tales, instructions and teachings to men, and all rebelliousness.

Prophesying is allowed, for that is to speak in an orderly, seemly way in the leading of the Spirit — that Spirit which inspires both men and women to speak those things that are fitting.

We see that this proves true in practice, for often women testify in the leading of the Spirit to great edification, and when the Spirit itself witnesses to it, surely we can’t oppose it.

It would be quite an oppressive thing if, in the church, we were to prohibit women from praying or prophesying (testifying), which even the Scriptures do not prohibit them from doing. Personally, I have never received authority from God to hinder them in this way. But in cases where a woman has been in a rebellious spirit, I have asked her to be silent, which is what the Scriptures also enjoin.

Outside of the meetings, there is no requirement that women shall keep silent, and I can’t see that we have the right to command them to do so. If a woman speaks to people “outside” the church, then this must be considered a work of “drawing to the Son.” For this work God uses all manner of things — for example: church bells, Christian songs and music, the death of a loved one, and many other things. So I don’t believe He intended to exclude women from this type of work, which must be characterized as the Father’s drawing to the Son, as opposed to the “Son’s work.” It is in the Son’s work — within the church — that the distinction between man and woman has relevance.

Paul had Priscilla and Aquila as his co-workers. Romans 16:3. Tryphena and Tryphosa were workers in the Lord. Romans 16:12.

God’s Spirit witnesses that the words “keep silent” are in the context of being in submission.

I have not changed my opinion in this matter, neither have I intended to exalt the woman over the man or place her higher than God has ordained. But for the sake of righteousness I will work to give them that right which the spirit of the Scriptures gives to women. If women, in all submissiveness, could be Paul’s coworkers, surely they can be co-workers in our day and age.

In these things the letter of the law kills, but the Spirit gives life. It would be of little joy or profit to a man to have a wife who never spoke! On the other hand, it is of great joy or profit to have a wife who is submissive in all her speech and conduct, just as Sarah was in submission to Abraham and called him lord. It is just the same with Christ and the church and the allegory of the church with man and wife.

Whoever believes he is a prophet or spiritual will understand this commandment of the Lord. But if anyone does not understand it, then he must simply let it be, as Paul tells us.

I’ve conferred with brother Thorleif Hansen in Oslo about these things, and he is of the same understanding. In every place we ought to work together in the same direction, and in every place have the same practice and order among us. If God enlightens us further at a later date, we will be thankful for that, and I am certain that whatever He reveals will not run counter to the understanding we now have of the matter.

I would like this to be read by several brothers who bear responsibility for local churches.

Brother H. and I can now rejoice together on board when we fellowship over God’s Word, which is being revealed to us.

May Christ be honored and highly exalted, to the glory of the Father.

Greetings in the love of Christ.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Viking — Haugesund, January 30, 1918 — # 167


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

In almost every town there are many brothers and sisters among us who have accepted the doctrine and have submitted themselves in a human way, and we do not have any trouble with them. However, I believe that there are extremely few whose spirits have been made alive by the cleansing in the blood of the covenant. Otherwise there would not be so much passivity. I don’t know yet what we can do about this. I suppose we must just let them continue as they are. We can’t very well place some on our right hand and some on our left. But we should be aware of the situation.

I have met many such silent brothers and sisters who, in one sense, are with us; but quite honestly, I don’t know what to do with them. After working with people like this I have felt sick to death in my spirit. I have felt like I had been wading through mud up past my knees. I have been afraid that I might destroy them by dealing too severely with them. Yet even the most glorious treasures don’t bring them any joy, because these treasures don’t belong to them. It is possible, of course, to gather a lot of people like this who have been convinced in a human way, but is that of any profit??? Isn’t it better to sleep in the assembly of the dead than in ours??? On the other hand, I fear to tread down the outer court of the Lord.

I have been here on the west coast now for nearly three-and-ahalf years and have been in Finnmark for about six months. Although I know it has been God’s will for us to be here on the west coast, I am really looking forward to coming east again.

Greetings to you, your family, and the brothers and sisters there from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Haugesund, February 9, 1918 — # 168


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your circular letter. X would like to get hold of things yet save his skin. Many people would like to do this, but praise God that it never succeeds. Since it is not likely that he will put holes in his own skin, that will have to be our job. We are ministers of the new covenant — ministers of the Spirit. There are certainly plenty of high places under X’s skin which can be taken hold of and pulled down, so that he can receive this understanding which he so longs to possess. But everything must be done in the Spirit. If we are not in the Spirit, we can neither build nor pull down because Jesus says, “Without Me you can do nothing.”

It is true that we must sow with tears. How glorious it will be to reap with joy! If only I knew of a remedy for this sluggishness — this spiritual gangrene. Silence is an awful hiding place. It doesn’t provide any opening where one can use the crowbar. I’ve just about had enough of all this “yes, yes” to whatever I say. I’m beginning to prefer outright contradiction, because at least then you can wrestle with them until they have to give up. I’ve met a number of these silent types. They want to do what is right, and they only have good intentions, but at the same time we are powerless when it comes to helping them. The blood of the covenant — Spirit and life — doesn’t come to them the way we would like it to. I’m sure you have plenty of experience with this.

Greet the brothers and sisters wherever you meet them.

Brotherly greetings in the love of Christ from your brother, working together in the ministry,

J. O. Smith





Haugesund, April 11, 1918 — # 169


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter.

Chastisement will drive foolishness far away from a youth, but when a person drags foolishness far into the age where he should be honored as a father, then chastisement becomes hard to bear. But if it becomes hard to bear, and chastisement is life itself, how difficult it will be to bear life! Therefore, a man should seek his Creator in the days of his youth, before he reaches the age when he must say, “I have no desire for it,” (namely, for the fear of the Lord).

I believe, as you say, that a thorough work with one man yields greater fruit than a superficial work with the masses, for one David was better than ten thousand. God doesn’t recognize the masses except as masses. But those few individuals who accept a more exact explanation of the way, He makes to be pillars in His temple. The more pillars, the greater the house and the larger the crowds. We are not to seek the crowds, but they come automatically when there is really a man worth hearing. This, too, is one of the mysteries of Christ, hidden behind the flesh but revealed by the fear of God.

Greet the brothers and sisters and your family. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, September 4, 1918 — # 170


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you so much for the fellowship we had in Horten. It was so good and edifying to be together after so many years of separation! We talked mostly about the ministry and stewardship. I believe that clear understanding in these areas will eliminate many difficulties. We can see many faults in a beginner, but we must be stewards with our light, or we can destroy him. The fact that someone is a steward and has something to be a steward over indicates that he already has a storehouse from which to draw. Knowledge about stewardship only comes after a person has built up a spiritual storehouse and after he has been entrusted with something.

I wrote an article yesterday to Skjulte Skatter about stewardship. I hope that knowledge about these things will correct a lot of errors. Where there is no revelation, people go astray and cast off restraint. That is very apparent.

Hearty greetings to you and to the sisters in your home. Special greetings to Judith.

Your brother, sharing in the ministry and in the tribulations,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 19, 1919 — # 171


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace from God!

This is to let you know that my and our deeply beloved brother, Aksel, died in Christ Jesus yesterday. I was with him on January 17. He was extremely weak. It was moving to see how deeply the young people in Drøbak were grieved — as were the older ones. Blessed be his memory and his work.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings. Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 21, 1919 — # 172


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

I’ve just received a letter from Helga. She writes that she would like Thorleif Hansen and me to speak at their home and for you to speak at the grave. I think that is most suitable. We would deeply appreciate it if you would do that. The funeral will start at the house at 2:00 p.m. this Saturday. Looking forward to seeing you.

Greet all the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 7, 1919 — # 173


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s good peace!

Thank you for your very good letter, from which I see that you plan to move back to Hønefoss and that you have bought a house up there. I believe it is God’s will for you to be there. It is centrally located for the whole country. I am glad that you are going to put your hand to the work in Hønefoss and the surrounding area. I got a letter from brother O. He is very zealous.

I was at a meeting recently and, after the leader had finished speaking about 2 Peter, chapter 1, I took up verses 3 and 4 again and explained them in more detail. To my great surprise, the Word found entrance. The Sunday before, the preachers had talked about listening to “Jesus alone.” They said that people should learn only from Him, but shortly after that they made a slip when they mentioned having gone to Bible school in Oslo in order to learn as much as possible about their precious Savior. Yesterday I took this up, and they sat there wide-eyed when I said I was sure there must be other instructors in that Bible school besides “Jesus alone,” and that there can’t be anything wrong with that, since it is Jesus who has placed apostles, prophets, teachers, etc. in the church, and all these are in “Jesus alone.” This slogan disappeared, and I believe they were able to see the church’s servants in “Jesus alone,” because during the prayer time at the end of the meeting there was a lot of genuine acknowledgment of the truth.

It seems so strange that Aksel is gone. I can’t really comprehend it. The funeral was almost like a conference; it wasn’t full of grief and mourning like funerals usually are. Even in death Aksel has made an impact. Here in Horten, in two assemblies, they cried when they read the issue of Skjulte Skatter about his passing.

I believe that by God’s grace and help the work in different places will go well. All strife comes purely and simply from the lusts of the flesh. If we fear God and in honor give preference to one another, then such strife can’t occur. The greatest among you must be the servant of all. We need to instruct the brothers and sisters right from the start that true greatness does not come by walking over others, but by going under and serving each other. We have seen how people destroy themselves when they try to win great esteem by trampling down those who appear to be standing in their way. That has never been successful, and it never will be; the laws of the Spirit forbid it. These laws bind the fathers’ hearts to their children, and they bind the children’s hearts to the fathers. We have spoken together about this.

Remember Drøbak whenever you have opportunity. We have an obligation to look after the work of our beloved brother, Aksel. We must make every effort possible to do good work and much work. We have a definite purpose in our work, and the best thing about this work is that God is with us.

Blessed wisdom from God! With all my heart I praise my God and Father through our beloved Lord Jesus Christ that He in His boundless grace has revealed the fragrance of His knowledge to us, and that He has given us a part in this work and an inheritance together with the saints in the light.

Aksel’s death has promoted our growth, because I, and certainly you and other brothers, have had to lay hold of a portion of what was in him in order that his portion in the work can be carried on. God’s counsel and wisdom are wonderful! He now stands where he is, as an unshakable pillar. We shall meet again in immortality with glorified bodies. Oh, what a comfort! May we number our days, that we may gain a heart of wisdom. Aksel often repeated what Ole Skiaker said: “Time is our life.” Let us remember that, dear brother.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters who are with you. Loving greetings to you in the precious fellowship of the Spirit.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 15, 1919 — # 174


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace from God!

Thank you for your very good letter. There are many tribulations in this world, but everything works for our best.

Today I wrote to sister X and explained to her that in the church we are all one, and there are no “class distinctions.” But outside the church we ought to give each person the honor and respect that is due him. If two brothers in Christ are in the military, one a general, and the other a private, it isn’t fitting for the private to address the general with “Hey, George,” or the police chief with “Hi, Pete.”

Brother Berg has more seniority than me, and because of that I have always kept to his left when we walk together, and I have greeted him first. That has been very natural.

It is quite possible that some of these “upper class” ladies will begin to demand special treatment because of their social status. There aren’t many of them, but we must keep an eye on them so that they don’t put on airs because of what they are according to the flesh. Even worse is the increasing use of the du* form and addressing people by their first name. That fosters arrogance, and it is almost impossible to stop later on. In Drøbak there are many young boys and girls who have just been saved. It is distasteful to hear them saying du and calling older brothers and sisters by their first names. The De form is an expression of honor and respect.

I hope that by God’s grace we can get rid of this spirit in its infancy. We have to pull up the weeds on both sides as soon as they appear. It’s different when two people agree to be on first name terms.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Greetings in the love of God.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith


* In Norwegian there are two ways of addressing a person: the du (you) form, which is familiar and casual, and the De (you) form, which is more polite and formal.





Horten, October 7, 1919 — # 175


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your very good letter.

There is a transition from being just a listener to being a brother who bears responsibility. This is a dangerous time in a man’s life. We need to help brothers who are in this phase; but we must help them to help themselves — otherwise they will never become pillars in the temple of God. You can pamper them for so long that they never dare to stand on their own two feet. Aksel said that the eagle pushes her young out of the nest from the highest mountain peak. But if she sees that it will end in disaster she swoops down and rescues them. There are several brothers here who will soon need to be thrown out of the nest if anything is to come of them. They should be allowed to make some mistakes.

Last Sunday we had an unusual conversation here about Psalm 118, from verse 19. The main point was that it is others who bind the sacrificial offering to the altar. This conversation was a blessing for several people.

Greetings in the love of Christ.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Norge — Horten, November 22, 1919 — # 176


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

I am now to be the paymaster of a warship for the first time, and there is a lot to learn.

When God is with us, life is so blessed. He gives us clarity of mind and focuses our thoughts on things which are difficult to understand, so we can grasp them with our mind, whether they be spiritual things or natural things. His name be honored, now and in eternity — by us and through us.

By God’s grace, I held Bible studies as long as there was anyone willing and capable of receiving. But in the long run, it became too much. Their understanding of the teaching exceeded their understanding of how to put it into practice; so for them it was only doctrine. One day, when this became really clear for me, I told them that from now on we would change things. Each one was to get started and work with the capital that he had. Begin to evangelize, foster, and raise children. Perhaps that would bring them more understanding of the way of life than continuing with Bible studies.

Everyone was agreeable to this. Brother Karl Martinsen is now having meetings for children, about 50, mostly boys. Three of my children confess Jesus Christ as their personal Savior.

Brother Ellefsen is my faithful co-worker, with the paper and with many other things.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith



NOTE:

A number of letters have been lost in the course of the years. Note the date on the next letter.





Horten, January 17, 1925 — # 177




Where Shall the Meeting Hall in Oslo Be Located ???

To Brother Elias Aslaksen:

	Thank you for the letter which I received from you.

	The Oslo situation is a riddle, through and through.

	Yet in all of these matters the Lord will surely guide,

	When we just close our eyes and lay our senses all aside.

	The need is for a meeting hall, a place to build the church.

	Where can the right location be? We wonder as we search.

	We’d looked throughout the city and at the edge of town,

	And then at last in Grefsen a location had been found.

	But right away the Building Commission told us, “no!”

	As soon as with our blueprint we our plans to them did show.

	So, therefore we are wondering, and we just do not know.

	Perhaps into the center of town we ought to go.

	Both the men and women are fumbling around,

	Like “blind man’s buff,” not knowing at all where we are bound.

	Of course, we have a temple within us all the time.

	To Furukoll, go therefore — let all the foolish climb.

	As far as I’m concerned, I’d my body rather spare

	From having such a long way to get to meetings there.

	For women and for children, it surely would not do.

	The elderly and weak would be wearied by it, too.

	“Well, I believe the very best place for us to be

	Is certainly the place that is right next door to me!”

	On Rosted Avenue that is what I hear them say.

	“At Furukoll, at Furukoll, that’s where I want to stay!!”

	It is a crowing voice from the heights that I can hear.

	As scarlet as a cockscomb he crows out loud and clear.

	“Well, what do you think?” you are asking me.

	O yes, I will answer immediately:

	The Grand Hotel on Karl Johan without doubt!

	The men and the women we’ll have to throw out.

	There’ll be no more parties — put out each cigar!

	There’ll be no more drinking — we’ll close down the bar!

	And if they’re not willing at once to obey,

	With rod and with staff we’ll drive them away —

	The cooks and the waiters from each room and hall,

	And no one shall answer us back, none at all;

	For we have endeavored to clean this place out.

	If any should have other thoughts or should doubt,

	Our strength unto them we will then have to show.

	We can’t tolerate any nonsense, you know!

	Yes, things here are changing since we’ve taken charge

	Of this fine facility, spacious and large.

	“The Traveling Set” shall be soon moving in,

	And we will by Sunday our meetings begin.

	Now we are finished with seeking in this way.

	There’s been quite enough of this method, I should say.

	Our reason is usually tangled in the mesh

	Of all the restrictions we carry in the flesh.

	The wise men who came from the East to find God’s Son

	Were three, and yet in their quest they went as one

	To Bethlehem, to the place the star had led,

	Until it stood there, directly overhead.

	They plumbed and they measured, and thus the star did guide,

	To the Child of whom it of old was prophesied.

	They stood at His manger with the prophecy fulfilled,*

	And this is the place where each one his house shall build.

	Of thousands of stars unto which they could give heed,

	There was only one which could to the stable lead.*

	Of all the boy babies who were dwelling in that town,

	It was in this way that the right one could be found.

	It was in this way, which the Spirit to them taught.

	They honored Him then, with the myrrh which they had brought.

	And Herod was left behind with all the galaxy,

	to grope around vainly and attempt to see.

	But neither the Child nor the star could Herod find;

	It was far too exalted for his royal mind.

	This learnéd man then had his soldiers sent around,

	That all the baby boys should be sought out and found,

	And all be put to death, the One life to thereby claim.

	And yet all this was futile, and he was put to shame.

	For while in Judea, blood flowed at his command,

	The Little One was safe, far away in Egypt’s land.

	If you in Oslo want to build a meeting hall,

	Then do not seek as Herod, O horrors, not at all!

	Do not grasp after all the stars you see up in the sky,

	But only on the right one start focusing your eye.

	The clouds will quickly vanish when to the Lord you pray,

	And just above the right place the star will shine its ray.

	In the clear skies of the Spirit, your morning star will shine;

	And when there is humility, it is not hard to find.

	It always will be shining o’er the place the Baby lies,

	And without pomp or flattery, direction it supplies.

	There, where the star is at its zenith, you will be on track.

	Then nothing in this world will make you shudder or draw back.

	Directly underneath it you will locate the right place,

	The place of God’s own choosing which He blesses with His grace.

	Then put your shoulder to the task; build there, where God has blessed.

	His heavenly good pleasure, with a smile, will o’er you rest.

	“But who will find this special place?” you may begin to ask.

	You’ll have to work out all those matters there, for that’s your task.

	For I have merely functioned as a guidepost for these things,

	Who afterwards just lightly flits away on unfurled wings.



Hearty greetings to you and all the brothers and sisters.

Your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith


* The amazing thing is that the place they finally found was a stable, which they remodeled to be a meeting hall.





Horten, June 17, 1925 — # 178


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter from Hemsedal. I was glad to hear that you visited brother Løken in his apartment. But the best thing of all was to see how you rejoice over one soul as if it were a whole flock. This is a grace which is not given to everyone. I believe that something will come of brother Løken. I hope he’ll become something more than a dead man stuffed with “doctrines.”

I have written to the brothers and sisters in Copenhagen and asked if they really think it’s necessary that we come to Denmark. I wrote that we weren’t interested in making the trip just for the sake of traveling, since we have been to Copenhagen many times.

You said you would consider it a great joy to go to Copenhagen with me, but that it isn’t so convenient for you just now. For financial reasons, it doesn’t fit for me either at this time. That’s why I wrote to ask if they considered it necessary. We’ll see what they say. By God’s grace I have gradually become accustomed to what could be called “holy indifference.” In such an attitude it is impossible to be disappointed.

Furthermore, I must say that I am very thankful to God for His leading in my life in all things. At the end of our lives we will understand everything better than in the beginning. But I have already begun to see that wisdom is far better than riches, since riches follow on the heels of wisdom as its servant. Wisdom, in order to be wisdom, must contain righteousness, love, and truth. Consequently, it draws to itself the materials that are necessary in order to exercise righteousness, love, and truth, just like a chicken eats shells and chalk in order to produce eggshells, and fruit trees absorb calcium from the soil to form pits. All good things follow in the wake of wisdom, since wisdom needs all good things in order to continue to be wisdom. Therefore, wisdom is better than riches. The end of all things is at hand. We can rejoice over this, because for us the true beginning is coming.

Greet brother Moe and his wife, and the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings from your brother, sharing in the ministry for souls’ eternal welfare,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 19, 1925 — # 179


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letters from Nesbyen. It is a joy for me to hear that it’s going well, whether people are receiving the Word or not. The point is that they get to hear the Word, so they are without excuse.

Yesterday the well-known preacher X walked into our living room and introduced himself. He asked for a copy of the booklet Prayer, which he had read several years ago and thought was good. After he received the booklet, he asked if we could talk together about the person Jesus — whether He had sin in the flesh, etc. I explained, and he listened carefully. Afterwards, he explained how he had understood it. As usual, he compared Jesus to Adam before the fall. When he was finished, I said to him that Adam had no knowledge of good and evil before the fall but that we, as saved people, were to have this knowledge; also that we are to be gods, and this couldn’t be said of Adam before the fall. I spoke about Jesus having a will which had to be denied and offered up; I spoke about passive and active sin, etc.

He listened for a while, and then exclaimed: “If this is your true understanding of the question of whether Jesus had a will that needed to be sacrificed, then I deeply regret that I, and many others with me, have misunderstood you.” He asked if we had literature covering this subject. I gave him [Aksel Smith’s] Four Stages in the Life of a Believer and my commentaries on Ruth and Ephesians. He said: “I’m going to read these books with great interest, and after I have read them, you will be hearing from me. I don’t expect to understand everything, but in any case, I will preserve the love of God in my heart.” I replied that I, too, desired to be found in that love. We had only a short time to talk, because he had a meeting immediately afterwards, but the conversation was direct.

Greet the brothers and sisters in Ål. Loving greetings from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 23, 1925 — # 180


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letters from Hallingdal, the last of which I have just received now at dinner time. I rejoice that it has gone so well for you and the brothers and sisters up there. It is true that God’s Spirit is only able to work where there is poverty of spirit.

Twenty-five years have now passed since our work with these truths about the cross first began, and I’m often amazed when I see the fruits. Many souls have come to a stable life, marriages have been entered into, and children have been born because of this gospel. There have been battles, but also rich blessings. How it will continue depends on the faithfulness of those servants who will, in the future, watch over God’s flock. Without shepherds the flock will go astray. All the major religious movements have usually begun with many people, but have later declined. Our work began in all weakness, one person at a time. However, it has increased to such an extent that there is now a large assembly. The doctrines have stood the test; it is to be hoped that the lives of the individuals can keep up with them. Our comfort is that God is with us in the work. If we hadn’t experienced this again and again, we wouldn’t have been able to endure in the midst of all opposition. But now we continue in the faith that these are the Lord’s battles!!!

I’m looking forward to the trip to Denmark. I really believe it will be profitable. Brother Ellefsen and Karl Pedersen are also coming.

Greet the brothers and sisters in Hønefoss and everyone at home.

Loving greetings,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 30, 1925 — # 181


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

Thank you for your good letter. I hear that it’s not so certain that you can come with us to Denmark. I suppose that means there is still a slight chance.

It would give me great joy if more pioneering men and women could arise among us — “trail blazers.” There are, unfortunately, far too few such people. I gathered from brother Løken that he wanted to take up the battle there in Hallingdal. Such men can arise sooner than we think. My heart’s desire is that God will also supply such instruments in Denmark to fight the battles of the Lord.

We meet many things in life. It looks as if Satan has a great many interests to protect, especially concerning us. It’s as though he wants to share the inheritance with us.

Here in Horten we’ve been speaking about Revelation 22:14 in relation to Revelation 19:8. Everyone has received a robe which must be washed in the blood of the Lamb, just as Adam and Eve received a tunic of skins after the Fall. But, in addition to this garment, the Bride has received a bridal garment, which consists of deeds wrought by the Holy Spirit.

Greet the brothers and sisters who are with you, as well as your own family. Loving greetings to you from your brother, participating in the same battle and glory,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 4, 1925 — # 182


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

I’m enclosing the second letter from X. I don’t know quite how to respond. I’m inclined to stick with what you said, which was something to this effect: “A person cannot and ought not to believe that he understands everything. It’s wrong to think that one knows something and to insist that it is absolutely certain. This only demonstrates how immature one is.” This fits well in every situation where a person behaves as though he knows and understands everything.

All I know is what the Scriptures say about sowing. What one sows is not the body which is to be, but only a bare kernel. In the same way, the natural body is sown and the spiritual body is raised. Whether the natural body which is sown possesses the ability to germinate so that God from that seed is able to form a spiritual body, I can’t say. All we know is that it will be raised a spiritual body, and that’s enough for us.

We also know that those who have done good and those who have done evil will come forth from their graves. Whether God does it this way or that way is not really the point. It’s that “knowit-all” attitude — that’s the point.

October 23 was the last day they accepted applications for the position of Chief Arsenal Administrator, but I didn’t apply. It would have consumed my mind and my thoughts, and that just doesn’t appeal to me. My calling has never been to stop working, but rather to remain as free as possible.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Greetings to you with a word I found at random in the Bible just now: Ecclesiastes 9:10. Notice that it says “…do it with your might.” Compare that with Judges 6:14. Your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 2, 1926 — # 183


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen, Peace!

Sincere thanks for your good letter. It was a thorough report of your trip to Kristiansand, Brevik, and Sandefjord. I read it to the brothers and sisters yesterday. It appears that our opponents can’t get peace without openly acknowledging that they’ve backbitten us. This is in full accordance with Revelation 3:9.

God Himself will ensure that the word which is sown germinates, grows, and produces fruit which will be to your credit on that day. You will get the reward for what you have sown, and another person for what he has sown. And when one enters into another man’s labor unto salvation, they will share the reward.

The word of the cross is the power of God to us who believe. We might liken this “power” to dynamite. Dynamite requires resistance or pressure in order for it to explode. In the open air it burns with a red flame without exploding. From this we can understand that the word of the cross requires opposition in order to blow things apart. It’s possible to stand there at the pulpit and speak about dynamite. It’s also possible to ignite dynamite in the open air so that the whole thing is reduced to a colorful fireworks display which achieves nothing. Dynamite is not intended for fireworks; other things are better suited for such entertainment. Dynamite is designed to blow things apart.

Moreover, I believe that the way a man deals with people on a personal basis, and how faithful he is to speak the truth there, is of tremendous significance. People can say many good things from the pulpit, but I believe that it is on a one-to-one basis that things often fail, and the results are correspondingly poor.

Greet your wife, your children, and the brothers and sisters. I hope you can come to the Easter conference. In all likelihood, Anna Holtze and Emma Hansen from Copenhagen will be at the conference.

Loving greetings from everyone here and from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 3, 1926 — # 184


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

It seems to me as if the ungodliness of the world is increasing to such a terrible degree that one has every reason to be alarmed. Sports are rapidly becoming nothing more than entertainment, in which the course of this world and the powers of the air drive the masses like sheep. People marry and quickly get divorced. In their pride, people try to outdo one another. Children are lords, parents a necessary evil. Who knows how long all this can go on?

In many areas it is anything but love that reigns among the people of God, which means that there can’t be much love for God, either; because when one doesn’t love one’s brother whom one sees, how can one love God whom one doesn’t see? So we can all the more appreciate the brotherly love that exists among us and fellowship in the Holy Spirit. This becomes more precious to me every time I meet opposition and callousness from the outside.

A hole has been blown in the wall, and it looks as if one has to go through it. It is not so easy to make any new holes — even though one would like to tear down the entire wall.

We’re doing fine here and things are going well. There has never been such discipline and order within the church in Horten as there is now. The young people are growing up, and they have their own special meetings. The young people certainly understand more than what has become life in them. It’s a good thing that they have the meeting hall to gather in.

Many people have been blessed by reading [brother Smith’s book] Commentary on the Book of Ephesians. So it helps to write down what God gives.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 20, 1926 — # 185


Dear Brother in the Lord, Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you very much for the two letters from Brevik and one from Sandefjord. I rejoice greatly that the work of the Lord is progressing by your hand, and I hope that this continues as long as you live. Assuming my praise is genuine praise in the Lord, I will praise you by saying that, in your relationship to me and the church, you have always shown an especially praiseworthy example. This has often been of great comfort to me in my battles. Just as you have sown a good example, I will ask God to give you a rich harvest of souls who, in their relationship to you, show the same example of faithfulness and love.

What God has given us in Jesus Christ will stand the test of time. Things must continue beyond the ruins of all that is “choked,” until the blood comes up to the horses’ bridles. The “Pope’s holiness” has ruled far too long among God’s people. In other words, “respectable flesh” has mastered the sanctuary, so that God’s testimony — the witness of the Spirit, the water, and the blood — has been excluded. But now the wars of the Lord shall bring the witness of God into the light of day. These wars are beginning to bring us victory. For when Christ goes into battle, He goes conquering and to conquer.

I believe we’ve gained a foothold in Copenhagen. The Lord’s field of work is great, which is why the calling to be a priest is also great and covers a vast area. It’s so good to hear about the progress in Brevik. I wonder if there aren’t some souls there who can become servants of the Spirit. One has to go through a long period of schooling before one can be of any use — before one can, like Timothy, be of any real help and have love and care for others. A man can spend years occupied only with himself (they all seek their own). However, I believe and it is apparent that in these days God is able to mold servants after His own heart.

Hope to see you at Pentecost. The conferences are like Israel’s festivals. Greet the brothers and sisters, and warm greetings to you from your brother and co-worker,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 12, 1926 — # 186


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Sincere thanks for your good letter from Fredrikstad, from which I understand that you’ve been having good fellowship and that many brothers and sisters have been coming to the meetings. I’m glad that there are also people in Fredrikstad who have taken up their cross and set their course toward the heavenly Jerusalem.

“Behold, I lay in Zion a chief cornerstone.” 1 Peter 2:6. For unbelievers this stone has become a stone of stumbling. In other words, this stone must be lying right at our feet, since we can stumble over it. Since the stone is placed in Zion, this tells us that Zion itself is situated in a low place. When we look at this in the context of Jesus having descended to the lower parts of the earth (Ephesians 4:9), we understand what He accomplished down there. He laid the foundation for the temple, which rests on the foundation of the apostles and the prophets, Jesus Christ Himself being the chief cornerstone.

Jesus was not born in Herod’s palace, where the wise men from the East sought Him. They had to be led by God, quite contrary to what they assumed, to the lower parts of the earth, and there they found Jesus in a stable and in a manger. Even at His birth there was no room for Him in the inn. Even then He was outside the camp, without reputation. It was from this place, after He as a man had humbled Himself far below everyone, that He ascended far above all the heavens.

All people long to ascend, but they can’t make a single inch of progress upwards because they won’t descend into the lower parts of the earth. Only then does it become possible for us to ascend with Him.

So when we then think about the religious leaders of this world, who will not descend with Him — down from Herod and Pilate, from the counselors and scribes, down into the depths — isn’t their work all in vain because it is not built upon the foundation? The stone which the builders rejected has become the chief cornerstone. This is the rock which wise men dig deeply to find so they then can build upon it.

It is marvelous in my eyes to see this stone lying in Zion. Zion is so close that one nearly stumbles over it; that is to say, one despises Zion. God’s name is “Wonderful,” and all His works are wonderful. Since Zion is so close, it shouldn’t surprise us that we have come to Zion.

Please read this letter to the brothers and sisters at the next meeting in Drøbak, and give each one my warm greetings.

The last conference blessed the brothers and sisters in Horten in a special way. I am glad that you’re able to visit the brothers and sisters. This, too, is God’s goodness. I opened my Bible at random to look for a word for you and immediately found something which is in no way random — that is, 1 Timothy 6, from verse 13. Acts 24:16 is my testimony. Greet the church in Drøbak with Acts 2:42.

Loving greetings. Yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 29, 1926 — # 187


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Warm thanks for your good letter today, with the enclosed letters from brothers Bekkevold and Andreas Nilsen. I’ve also received letters from Drøbak and Oslo, besides hearing from Fredrikstad via others. Everywhere the brothers and sisters are being strengthened, which makes me very happy. God has given you an excellent ministry, dear brother, all in accordance with His foreknowledge and eternal calling.

I, too, have been thinking a great deal about humility, as you wrote. The longing and desire of my heart is to go the way down as the church develops. It was while He was in the likeness of man that Jesus humbled Himself. Herein lies the secret of all progress: “remain hidden” and “go down.” The church must — and will — make progress. The laws pertaining to the leaven and the mustard seed shall be fulfilled. There is no way around this! The Word of God shall and must be fulfilled, even down to the last detail. But everything must proceed in the same direction and in the same manner as things began. Just as you said at the conference, this is a building work.

Brother Theodor Ellefsen says there’s very much to do on the west coast. There might possibly be a conference in Molde during the summer vacation.

Sister X received quite a jolt last Friday. We spoke about the reproach of Christ. She was visibly shaken by the thought of sharing this reproach, and when she left that evening, I wasn’t sure whether she would come back. This looked quite uncertain, but she longed to come back again, and she did so yesterday (Sunday) evening. This time she was determined, as she put it, to take one day at a time, come what may. Now one can talk to her openly about anything one likes. While working with this sister, it’s become so living for me what it means to lay the foundation in a person’s life. Paul laid a foundation as a wise master builder. People who don’t seek any more than the forgiveness of sins have not had the foundation laid in their lives. Consequently there can be no building in their lives, either. The foundation must be laid with a full awareness of the reproach of Christ. I believe sister X is a very upright soul. I sense that she is gripped by the love of the Spirit for the brothers and sisters.

When the foundation is to be laid in a human heart, no leaven of humanness must be allowed to remain. If things are to be done thoroughly, drastic measures must be taken. Without this thoroughness things will be feeble and faltering.

Greet Andreas Nilsen and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings with Psalm 104:10.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 6, 1926 — # 188


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for the manuscript, What I Have Seen, which you sent to Skjulte Skatter. It’s true that before one has time to draw one’s sword, the opposition takes to its heels. All this is a good sign. That’s the way things ought to be. Then it’s fun to be a warrior. These are the wars of the Lord. Even the wife of Nabal understood about such wars. That’s why she got a better husband than Nabal.

Very few people in this world are fit for the kingdom of heaven. Usually one wants to serve oneself and sin all one’s life, and then

at the very end of life, on the day of reckoning, get forgiveness for everything. But then what has become of the building of God, the righteous deeds of the saints, the gold, silver, and precious stones? One loses inestimable treasures in the form of life and works.

X has gone through quite a bit in America. When he met brother B. he was extremely happy. Perhaps he can still be won. Give him one more year. The same with the others. Let’s try to rescue what we can. I think the punishment they have already received has had a powerful effect. God has pronounced judgment in the matter, and it is frightful. The race still lies before us, and we don’t know what everyone’s position will be on the course when the race ends. But we do know that mercy triumphs over judgment. Therefore, while we are still in the flesh, let us continue to show mercy toward all people. Nonetheless, who can prevent God’s judgment in such matters?

Brother X stopped coming to the meetings after creating many conflicts. One day a sister met him on the street and said, “We miss you at the meetings.” This had such an effect upon him that it moved him to tears. To think that someone had missed him — the troublemaker. God has also put obstinate ones among us, so that we through them can be tried and learn patience. The final judgment over them is in God’s hands.

Joshua was zealous on Moses’ behalf and wanted to stop the people from prophesying, but Moses answered, “Oh, that all the Lord’s people were prophets.” The disciples were zealous for Jesus. They wanted fire to come down and consume His enemies, but Jesus said, “You do not know what manner of spirit you are of.” Peter cut off Malchus’ ear in his zeal for the Master, but Jesus healed him. We are not to have a zeal on behalf of people (the saints), but a zeal for that attitude of mind that would save the souls of men to the uttermost.

Greet brother Andreas Nilsen and the other brothers and sisters. Loving greetings to you also, from your brother and fellow servant,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 8, 1926 — # 189


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace be with you!

I received your very good letter dated December 6. Thank you for the indescribably good news you sent, which I read to the brothers and sisters yesterday. Your work in the Lord is by no means in vain; on the contrary, it is extremely necessary and profitable. You can be sure that in my spirit I have been in Oslo the last few days, but in a special way, full of sighing and prayer. May God richly bless everything. The word of “the cross” has to succeed. You could well use the rest of your life to preach “the cross” against all flesh, all human wisdom, all reasoning and arrogance, all gluttony, all drunkenness, etc., etc., etc. If they’re going to give you a name of worth, you couldn’t get a better name than this* — but that’s their business. What we do for God is bound to succeed. Oslo, indeed the whole of Norway, needs to hear “on the cross.”* If it had seemed right to me, I’d have done everything possible to come to Oslo next Saturday; but for the time being, I feel that God has chosen you for that work. Therefore I will beseech God fervently on your behalf that He might fill you with the Spirit of wisdom, power, love, and might in order to complete the work already begun. If God sends me, I’ll come.

Sister L.’s unsaved husband refused to allow her go to the meetings, so she stayed home. When she stopped going to the meetings altogether, he asked her if she wasn’t going to go. “No,” she said, “I’m not allowed.” The responsibility then fell firmly on her husband’s shoulders, and he felt it so strongly that now he drives his wife to the meetings himself, and makes sure she gets there. Wasn’t that another good effect of sister L. taking up her “cross”? God could then start working on her husband.

Yesterday we spoke together about body, soul, and spirit. It is remarkably blessed to talk about it. To be able to discern between these three things brings tremendous clarity and peace, but it takes a long time to speak about it, and even longer to write. The lusts gain access to a carnal person’s mind through his senses and affect both soul and spirit. In a spiritual person, light comes from above into his human spirit. The soul gives its approval, and the body is then presented as an instrument of righteousness — in spite of the lusts within. The body is dead because of sin. One is either governed from below, through the senses, or from above, through the Spirit. Here we really get a thorough acquaintance with the cross. The cross puts an end to all worldly wisdom; it stops everything which comes through the senses from below. But it also makes one receptive to that knowledge which is from above. It functions like a valve, which shuts off the power from below but opens up the power from above.

Loving greetings to you all from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith


* A newspaper, when describing Brother Aslaksen’s meetings in Oslo, dubbed him “The Man on the Cross.”





Horten, February 16, 1927 — # 190


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for the good letter you wrote on the way to Hønefoss from Oslo. I see that everything is going well, just as I already knew. We, too, need God’s word to Joshua: “Only be strong and very courageous, that you may observe to do according to all the law which Moses My servant commanded you.” Then we’ll make progress!!! These are words of faith; they must be believed and, by faith, put into practice. Every tongue which rises against you in judgment you shall condemn. This is the heritage of the servants of the Lord. Do you believe this? Yes, thanks be to God, I know you do!!! This isn’t done by power or by might, but by the Spirit of the Lord. But we have the Spirit of Christ.

“Even if this world by devils were possessed,

Yet one word from ‘the cross’ has weight

To slay these uninvited guests,

While we, in spirit, celebrate.”

Therefore, dear brother, since your victory is also mine, fight the good fight of faith as a true son of Sarah, whose sons know no fear. Then the courage of your faith will bring your opponents to their knees, so that their courage will fail. First let them hear rumors, then the swarms of hornets will come, and finally the people with resounding praise. There is already a hole in the wall, and it’s getting bigger every day. Our opponents are insecure, and soon the wall will fall. But “our wall,” “the wall of Zion,” must be built high and solid, so that no Canaanite can get in.

I believe in the leaven’s power to generate life in itself so that in the end everything is leavened by the Word of the Lord. I don’t believe in tremendous leaps, but rather in the way things have developed the whole time, the way you yourself mentioned. This is a quick and effective “strategy for victory.” Warfare of this kind, so solid and genuine, is foreign to the spiritual hosts of wickedness in heavenly places, where they all as one come to a halt before the cross. It is just as foreign to “carnal Christians” (babes in Christ) as to soulish Christians. It is only known where the Spirit of God has leadership.

Yesterday at the meeting we spoke about tasting God’s goodness, that Jesus tasted death, etc., and that when we are together with people, we taste their spirit. This gives us an idea of what they need, and then the Spirit begins to search within us to find just those words that can be of help to them. It is possible to know the “form of doctrine” inside out and yet still not possess the ability to taste. When people have to settle something on their own, they usually go about it in completely the wrong way, precisely because they have not developed the ability to taste God’s goodness. This taste gives us a distaste for soulish scheming and everything that has its origins in the flesh.

Loving greetings with Psalm 94:11–16.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 5, 1927 — # 191


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace be with you!

Warm thanks for your two good letters and for the manuscripts. God’s Word is living and sharp, and it divides between soul and spirit, between joints and marrow, and discerns the hidden thoughts and intentions of the heart. It seems to me that a person must wear himself out as a soulish Christian in order to become a spiritual Christian, just as we sought to keep the law with all our might. It was a schoolmaster to bring us to Christ. It is the soulishness of man that causes all the turmoil in Christian assemblies. We cannot say that the soulish Christian sins — i.e., does the works of the flesh (Galatians 5:19) — but neither does he walk according to the Spirit, that he might become spiritual.

Of one thing we can be sure: there are very few spiritual people among the believers. All conceit, self-consciousness, self-righteousness, and arrogance, etc., belong to the soulish man. Everything revolves around the soulish “I.” True, one may be born again, but when the lines of communication to the world have not been completely severed by the cross, one continues to receive impressions from one’s surroundings (the earthly things), and one judges and reasons according to what the eye sees and the ear hears. This is anything but a righteous judgment. It is this kind of judgment that, for the most part, prevails in religious assemblies. Hence all the turmoil and unrest.

In order for Christ to rule as Head one must know nothing, understand nothing, and judge nothing until the One to whom all judgment has been given makes His will known. We no longer have anything to say and must bear the cross of insignificance. For those who think they know something, this is indeed a hard cross to bear! Thus, soulishness is put out of action and poverty of spirit takes its place. Christ is then the Head, with “my clever brain” serving merely as a receiver for Jesus Christ, the High Priest. We know nothing, possess nothing, and can undertake nothing. My works disappear, and God’s works come to light. The carnal (old) man is crucified, the natural (soulish) man becomes crucified, and the spiritual man (the man of God) once again appears here on earth as a true image of the Son of Man. Therefore, the cross over everything that is from below, over everything that is of myself, according to my nature!

Yes, dear brother, this has been much on my mind lately. The best thing God has given me is His light, which dispels my darkness.

Proverbs 31:9. May God bless you and your family. Loving greetings from your brother always happy in this light and grace,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 12, 1927 — # 192


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen, Peace!

Thank you for your good letter. X comes to our home very often. She has a desire to talk about matters concerning the kingdom of God. Would that God might save and keep her from a form of godliness without power, coupled with worldly pride and worldly wisdom. This is probably a highly lucrative source of income for Satan!!! Especially among that class of people who believe that they are a cut above everyone else. Yesterday afternoon X was in our home, and we talked about this matter. She said that this was something for her to take heed to.

It is amazing how stubbornly all that is “refined,” “splendid,” and soulish — the glory of the first Adam — clings to people. All of it is illuminated by a satanic light which, with its tinges of religiosity, gives it such an attractive appearance. May the sword of God, through the Holy Spirit, be quickly and firmly driven into all this greatly admired deviltry which, by God’s grace, I’ve learned to hate with all my heart.

Babes in Christ are carnal — they are immature, and are kept under guardians until the time appointed by the Father. It doesn’t really matter whether they grab their bottle, knock over a table, smack their mother on the cheek, bite their fingers, laugh, or cry. All one ought to do is to have consideration for their spiritual wellbeing and take away things that can harm them, etc. It doesn’t surprise me that brothers rejoice over all these things that I’ve mentioned, just like a mother with her children; but when one has many children, there just isn’t time for that kind of adoring attitude. The ministry requires realities: upbringing, nourishing, exhorting, etc. As a servant of God one is not to remain a child; one must grow up.

Warm greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 29, 1927 — # 193


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s peace in Christ Jesus!

On Sunday evening we had a blessed meeting in Oslo. Before lunch we had an amazing conversation about works wrought by faith. X was so gripped by this that she continued to speak about it for the rest of the day. She wanted to do what she could to spread these teachings.

Unfortunately, spiritual warfare is little known, even among the brothers and sisters. This is a great loss, because in this way Satan is able to sneak in and destroy, and ravenous wolves can come among the flock. I’m almost at a loss as to how to teach them to wage war, and how to instruct them to “smell” Satan when he tries to get into the assembly, so that they can get him out as soon as possible. It really grieves my heart that there is such a great and fundamental lack in that direction within the church. Here is an example of this:

Brother T. asked for advice in a matter. There was a telegraph operator who padlocked his blankets and other things in a cupboard. He told the others that he was afraid that T. would use them on his watch. Brother T. asked some of the brothers what he should do. They answered that he should simply be quiet and suffer. However, because T. has kept quiet about the matter, the telegraph operator has gone one step further, and T. says that the situation will soon become unbearable. I have now advised him to overcome in a completely different way: “When as many people as possible are gathered together, speak up and ask him what he means by locking up his blankets because of you. In that way you will completely disarm him in the presence of everybody. Moreover, you will get a peace that endures, and the others will be afraid of you.” Brother T. rejoiced over this, and he now intends to proceed in this way. I’ve tried something similar myself, and the result is that a great fear comes over people. I have advised brother E. along the same lines, and he is aglow with the joy of victory. It is an arch trick of Satan to make the people of God think that they shouldn’t fight for their own righteous cause. Everything is seen as defending oneself — that is to say, one’s flesh. However, we are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit. With this as a foundation we can direct the sharp sword of the Lord at these satanic spirits, who are not nearly as strong as the Spirit that dwells in us.

As long as brothers and sisters don’t understand how to wage war, they will need constant help and can never stand alone. But how are we to instruct them? This is the big question.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 19, 1927 — # 194


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace! Sincere thanks for the conference, which is still working in my thoughts, and which I believe did wonders. The brothers and sisters from Fredrikstad said that the hardest thing about these conferences is that it’s so painful to leave for home again. I reckon that hit the nail right on the head!

There was an amazingly strong grace — a real spirit of revival — over the meetings. I expect the same will break out in Oslo, too. Help comes from the Lord — unexpected help! May God give you abundant grace to be continually “dividing asunder,” so that the cross might make it impossible for the flesh even to breathe. We’ll be supporting you in prayer; and the hotter the battle rages, the greater the help. In the initial days of breakthrough, when the church was being raised up, God taught me during the night watch to wage spiritual warfare. It was with all my heart and with the most intense joy that, by God’s grace, I took up the battle. In my heart, mind, and spirit it felt as if tempered armor plate could be pierced like butter. I’m writing this so that you’ll know that no one will be able to stand against you when you are fully armed for war before the face of the Lord. Be a man of breakthrough all the days of your life. Be a savior for countless souls. May many generations be thankful for your battles. Slay and eat, for a great host is on your side, and their number is increasing. Bring justice to the poor and the downcast. Save them from the claws of the oppressor. God has given you a spirit and a sharp sword; use it all the days of your life!

Thank you for all your good words to me in the presence of the assembly. I took it as from God Himself, seeing it was said to God’s glory and with wisdom. This, too, served to strengthen the unity — both inwardly and outwardly. It gives me great joy to see all these dear brothers and sisters. This is almost more difficult to bear than all the opposition during the hardest days of the war. However, by God’s grace I will continue in my calling and election, in lowliness working with souls one at a time. From this position I will, by God’s grace, seek to strengthen you in your calling and election. This will be the covenant of peace between us, a vital covenant preordained by God, which shall endure until the end of the ages. This shall be our motto forever: “The greatest shall be as the least among you.”

My warmest greetings and thanks to you for everything we’ve experienced together to this day. Greet your family and the brothers and sisters.

Your brother in the Spirit, water, and blood, striving for these very things,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 20, 1927 — # 195


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Sincere thanks for your letter, which I received at noon today. It was a real joy to hear about the results of the first meetings in Bergen. It’s bound to go the same way there as it did in Oslo. True enlightenment is what is needed, and this is the fire that Jesus came to cast upon the earth and which He wished were already kindled. This will continue to work as a judgment over God’s house until the work of sanctification is completed. So, cast fire and spare not!!! It is already kindled. No one is going to get the upper hand over you in your ministry for God. Only be strong and very courageous. Let us stand before God’s face, and those who have been appointed to eternal life will be drawn in. The others will be scattered because of their own resistance, whether they’ve looked into what it’s all about or not. It was good that brother Madsen was there briefly in the very beginning. It was certainly about time that people in Bergen heard something out of the ordinary.

The third chapter of Isaiah, from the beginning to the end, suits our present-day Jerusalem well. Every age has its Jerusalem — ours, too. Every age has its prophets — also our age. Every prophet has the task of exposing apostasy — also the prophets of our time. The prophet is a rod of correction in the hand of the Lord, a scourge in flesh and blood, and a tool to show people the way. “Which of the prophets did your fathers not persecute?” Stephen said. A prophet occupies an exposed position; he gets to the heart of the matter, and because of this he is hated. This hatred causes him to turn inward, and he must, like David, strengthen himself in the Lord his God. Then with renewed strength he can advance once more and say like David, “By my God I can leap over a wall.”

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 26, 1927 — # 196


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

It was a great joy to receive your two letters. Thank you for them. God directs our paths according to His counsel, and it is the heritage of the servants of the Lord to condemn all their adversaries. We have adversaries, but the very fact that they oppose us renders them powerless, because we can do nothing against the truth — only for the truth and in its power. People are getting stirred up, and the sparks are beginning to fly, just like when they shouted, “Great is Diana of the Ephesians!” But what has become of her greatness now? All that remains is a record of the Ephesians’ folly printed in black and white. What are we to do, then? Preach the Word, in season and out of season — a stumbling block to the Jews and foolishness to the Greeks, but the power of God to us who believe. This is the foundation for our endurance.

My three week vacation begins July 4. God will guide my path. Praise and honor to His name!

It’s heartening to hear about the meetings in Bergen. Things will always go well as long as it goes well with us. All progress is dependent upon us, because God’s work is complete and ready for us. It’s vital to lay hold of what has been given to us — lay hold of the laws of the Spirit by faith, put these laws to use by faith, drive Satan back by the laws of the Spirit and faith, and stand, having overcome everything, by the laws of the Spirit and faith. There are laws in the Spirit, so all respect of persons is excluded. Only those who lay hold of these laws can make use of them.

There are laws for making use of the power in a motor and in a boiler. There are laws for applying the force of gravity, and laws for overcoming it. Just find the laws, and we’ll get the help we need. Laws are named after those who discover them, yet God established them centuries ago. Likewise, there are laws of the Spirit that set us free from the law of sin and death and that put to death the deeds of the body and all the power of Satan. Blessed are those who see these laws and employ them lawfully (Ezekiel 34:16).

Greet the brothers and sisters in Bergen, and loving greetings to you from your brother and co-worker,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 28, 1927 — # 197


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Hearty thanks for your last two letters. It gives me great joy to know that things are progressing — in spite of all the opposition.

Genuine opposition is straightforward and easy to fight against, but the cunning of Satan is worse. It can be difficult to keep one’s balance on a slippery slope, but you’ve received wisdom from God. I don’t say this because you’re not aware of it, but rather to remind you to keep Satan in any form at arm’s length. Therefore, advance to battle armed before the face of the Lord, for God is with you. Spare not; use the sword of the Spirit to the right and to the left. Let those who need it feel its edge, for the battle is the Lord’s!!!

People repeat what superficial preachers say without bothering to examine it. Therefore, stand in the light that they do not understand, and rebuke them for the sins they know they have committed. Be an enigma for them until they humble themselves. It is to the Lord’s honor and also our own that we win a complete victory, such as is fitting on the day of battle. Don’t let your victory be halved by their intrigues, because no weapon that is formed against you can prosper. They won’t be able to resist the power and the wisdom you’ve received from God. Therefore, preach full victory, with the condition being total surrender — nothing less.

May God continue to be with you and give you great grace in the work — especially in battle and in watchfulness concerning those who call themselves Jews and are not.

Nehemiah 4, from verse 15 and to the end of the chapter, and also Nehemiah 6:15–16. Our task is to build up the walls of Jerusalem.

Loving greetings from your brother in the battle,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 23, 1928 — # 198


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Brother Ellefsen and I have just come from Fredrikstad, where the brothers and sisters were glad for a visit.

God has given you a great task in life, but not one that’s greater or more difficult than can be accomplished. My heart’s desire is that God will give you fellow workers among the younger ones, for it seems as though a person is unable to continue as priest and slayer of sacrifices longer than between the age of 25 and 50. Numbers 8:24–26. The ministry thereafter is more of an inner nature, relating to things of the house. This is also in accordance with man’s natural strength, which is greatest in those years.

I assume you have received my letter, in which I wrote that I’ve resigned effective October 15. God willing, my hands will then be freer. But I’ve never been a preacher, and I never will be one, either. Even so, there can be other work to do within the churches, if God so wills. In any case, this will be a new period in my life.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 24, 1928 — # 199


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen, Peace!

Warm thanks for your good letter which I received today. It brought me great joy. Yes, I do believe in progress among the upright in heart, but they need to be drawn up out of the dung, just like iron filings are drawn by a huge magnet. Where possible, try not to make the hill too steep for them. Make the slope more gentle, but with your sights on the same goal. And as I said: where possible. If this can’t be done, just let it be. However, the cunning of a serpent coupled with the simplicity of a dove can work wonders, provided one is always in the Spirit.

Yes, progress is slow but sure, from a very humble beginning. This life is so lowly that one stumbles over it, and so exalted that it makes one dizzy. When people say this is bondage, they are talking nonsense; in fact it is a masterly and all-victorious liberation. God has given the hill a very gradual slope for us. The gradient has been slight. Because of this, the way has been bearable to walk on. But now we are approaching the heights where they worship Baal, and things could end up in a confrontation. Here we can thoroughly enjoy ourselves by striking a blow, because we are waging the wars of the Lord. Nothing can stop this war. Just make sure that the spirit which has kept us on the outside is always kept on the outside. This spirit must never occupy a priestly office among us. Away with it! Woe to him who keeps back his sword from blood!

I’m happy that soon I’ll be free of my commission in the Navy. I can hardly believe it’s possible.

May God give you progress on all fronts, so that in His power you can cast down arguments and every high thing that exalts itself against the knowledge of God. May warriors grow up after you, who continue to fight unceasingly, as long as Satan and evil are there to fight against. It isn’t just that you yourself fight, but that in the heat of the battle warriors are raised up who take sides and begin to wage war.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings to you from your brother, deeply interested in the wars of the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 13, 1928 — # 200


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter from Hønefoss. I believe Fredrikstad is now ripe for a more thorough work — full speed ahead on the right track.

Times have changed compared to a few years ago. We’re on the threshold of a new epoch. May God help us to understand our time and to use it. When you say that the whole Bible testifies against whited walls and whitewashing, it is because such things need to be exposed. In Kristiansand I only had to open my Bible, and it was full of “direct hits.” This is the Lord’s doing. It is marvelous in our eyes.

We haven’t heard anything about my resignation yet, but I’m looking forward to it. Brother Ellefsen has also submitted his resignation. So we both resigned — without having mentioned it to one another. I don’t know what all this means. Undoubtedly something unexpected is going to happen, which we can’t see yet. I can’t believe that these unusual things take place as if they were normal events. Such an opportunity has never been given in the Navy before, and it was made to order for us.

True, we are foolish enough to be optimistic. Nonetheless, I’d prefer to look at things soberly, since time and time again my understanding of things has been turned upside down. Because of this I’m going to wait on the Lord and peer through the fog until I sight land (as far as the ministry is concerned).

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your brother peering through the fog in hope,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 8, 1928 — # 201


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

Thank you for your two good letters from Hønefoss. Thank you for your zeal and for all the good work which, by the manifold grace of God, you have been able to accomplish in Fredrikstad according to God’s leadings.

The time of upheaval has arrived. The manger is empty. The hungry are crying for bread. Being free, you’re in an advantageous position. What God has allowed us to know of Him through the Holy Spirit flows out unceasingly from the sanctuary and brings health and vitality to all who drink of this living water.

I’ve written an article entitled: “Jesus as High Priest.” This has a lot to do with Christ manifested in the flesh.

Yes, I would like to be young again like an eagle, yet keep the experiences I’ve had which have given me knowledge of Him who is from the beginning.

We’re expecting you here for the Easter conference. Then we can kill several birds with one stone, as they say.

You ought to look after your body, so that it lasts for a long time. Don’t destroy the temple of God — even though the body is presented as a sacrifice. These late night meetings could certainly be shortened with virtually the same result. I remind you of this, as I don’t believe you can continue in this way without your strength being sapped in the long run — even though your body is quite strong.

Loving greetings to you and your family from your brother sharing in the work and the ministry,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 13, 1928 — # 202


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Sincere thanks for your good letter, from which I see that you are now in G. and have undoubtedly had many experiences. You are alone over there, and it can no doubt feel like heavy going to fight the good fight of faith among so many different kinds of people. Nevertheless, God is with you, and the saints are fighting alongside you in their prayers.

It is a glorious ministry, and by endurance and faith the reward will also be glorious. We’ve been given our task in the work of the kingdom of God and must do our duty; others must do theirs. But I’m convinced that the word of the obedience of faith, the cross for the flesh, victory in temptation, etc. will shoot holes in all this false preaching which brings sleep and death into Christianity. Be therefore extremely bold, knowing that God has chosen you as a weapon in this fight to bring the truth into the light of day and give it its rightful place in the assembly. This is a great task, requiring tremendous humility, love of the truth, faithfulness, and perseverance in order to complete such a work. But as your days are, so shall your strength be.

Over the years, strong opposition from every side has had the effect — and powerfully so — of making me feel very lonely. But in the Spirit, I have plenty of company. Our connection with the outside is totally broken off, and there is even a high wall all around us. It is inside this wall that we live. However, even within the wall one senses different degrees of that fellowship which should be so intimate. This is probably because we still have our flesh with us within the wall. How much notice we take of this determines the degree to which we get fellowship.

I wish you every blessing, the power of God, and wisdom to speak God’s word in G. and everywhere else you go.

Loving greetings with Isaiah 21:6–10.

Yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 19, 1928 — # 203


Faithful Brother in the Lord, Elias Aslaksen,

Peace which surpasses … !!!

Thank you very much for your letters from G. You can be quite certain that your stay in G. will not be in vain. They’ve heard something and will have to give account for it, whether it be unto life or death. What little opposition we encounter is nothing compared to the exceeding glory which will be revealed in us. Indeed, resistance increases the glory, just as an object is polished by a buffing wheel. Therefore: Hallelujah to our God, who has counted us worthy of such a great grace! Here we share common sufferings for the same cause. But where there is no cause, there are no sufferings. However, we are not of those who are without a cause, for God’s cause has become our own. Therefore, and precisely because of this, we don’t lose courage. But we have renounced all the hidden things of shame, because such things are not found in Him. We only walk straight ahead on the paths of righteousness, on the way that is open before us. This is the way of faith and the way of hope, the way on which love rejoices in the truth. So: Forward warriors, men of the cross, men of arms, men of truth and faith. Nothing is too great for you. By our God we leap over walls.

All our enemies are like dumb dogs who cannot bark but who, deep in their dens, speak evil and bare their teeth. But thanks be to God, our war is the war of the Lord. It isn’t fought in a corner, but in the open and according to God’s will. “Persecuted, but not forsaken, struck down, but not destroyed,” is the same as saying we receive grace and power to keep coming back. If it had said, “Always persecuted, always discouraged,” etc., we would have had every reason to give up. Instead, it is written: “Thanks be to God who always gives us the victory.” This is the same as saying: “Thanks be to God who always gives us someone and something to conquer.” The only reason we are constantly being delivered to death is so that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh. But where this life is made manifest, the result is life, vitality, and the joy of victory. There is much to say about these things when they are manifested in power.

Greet the brothers and sisters, and loving greetings to you with Isaiah 61:9 from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 21, 1928 — # 204


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your letter from Fredrikstad which I received today. All of us here rejoice that God is giving you grace and progress in that town. The wars of the Lord continue, and nothing can stop them. The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord. Darkness is being driven back, and true light now pours forth in all its simplicity, warmth, and beauty. Now many shall rejoice in this light. No one can stop it; it has life in itself. He who receives this light doesn’t need to inquire of his neighbor or brother. There is receptivity for it among the poor, those who are nothing in this world, and among those who are ignored. Truth shall spring out of the earth and righteousness shall look down from heaven, and these two kiss each other. Woe to him who gets caught between these two forces! This is the power and the core of the gospel which bursts the outer shell, so that life springs forth and takes root in the hearts of those who believe the Word.

Here in Horten the children and young people continue to pray and testify. There is a blessed spirit of revival among them. I can only stand by in speechless amazement and behold all this blessing and glory. Soon I won’t have any other ministry than just to be quiet and watch God’s salvation. How strange that it should be like this.

It now looks as if the blessed work that has taken place in secret is beginning to bear fruit in the open. The water flowed from the sanctuary, and wherever it went it brought life and healing. It’s the same with this work. The result will be a multitude of people.

Greet the brothers and sisters in Fredrikstad. Loving greetings to you with Genesis 41:4–7. “So Pharaoh awoke.” Note this.

Your brother of the second crop of grain, and the second group of cows,*

J. O. Smith


* See last paragraph in the section: Excerpts From Various Letters, page 410.





Horten, April 2, 1928 — # 205


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

Thank you for your good letters.

High walls encompass Jerusalem!!!

Everyone who loves and preaches the truth is a builder of the wall. Within the wall is truth and justice; outside is enmity. The wall stands as a protection against the hatred on the outside. Inside there is quietness. No ungodly person can come in. Revelation 21, from verse 10. There mustn’t be any holes in the wall that make it easier to come in. There are prescribed gates through which we are to enter. He who comes in by another way is a thief and a robber. Such people must leave. When you were denied the use of a meeting hall in K., it was because of the wall. Oh, blessed wall — the wall of Jerusalem!!! May it always be our strong fortress and protection. Inside this wall, he who is weak will be able to say, “I am strong.”

A few people among us think it’s a pity that this wall has to be there, because they know so many good Christians outside the wall. But I’m afraid that these “good Christians” are worshiping idols on the high places, which is the very reason they find themselves on the outside. And what is idolatry on the high places, if it isn’t the admiration of all that is “great” in this world? On this point, the Christian and non-Christian find they have a common understanding, because they worship the same idols on the high places: i.e., cultural refinement, renowned authors, music, magnificent sermons, universities, highly educated people. Religious people who worship these gods are outside the wall.

The conference will soon be here, and I’m really looking forward to seeing all the brothers and sisters again. My son Kristian got married on the 31st of March. He is the first one to leave home. All these things remind one of how short life is.

I’m really looking forward to seeing and hearing you at the conference, dear brother. Your ministry is great in my eyes.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your brother at rest both in honor and dishonor,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 15, 1928 — # 206


My faithful and steadfast Brother, Elias Aslaksen,

Hearty thanks for your two letters.

Today has been a great day in my life. God is gracious and merciful. Between 10:30 and 11:00 this morning I was with the commanding officer for our unit, and said good-bye. Thus nearly 40 years of naval service have come to an end. I’ve always longed and yearned to be wholly at the disposition of God for the service He might have for me.

We have extended the basement of the meeting hall so that there will be room for two more tables at the conferences. It was good to hear about the conference in Fredrikstad. It will soon be time for another conference. The years roll slowly by, and we are getting older. May God give us grace and power to use the time well. I’m thankful God has given you to us, dear brother. Your work will bear eternal fruit.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Greet brother Sigurd Bratlie, with whom you are presumably staying. Loving greetings.

Your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Bergen, November 20, 1928 — # 207


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

I’m writing this letter at the post office in Bergen. We have already had three meetings. Here in Bergen, Oslo and Nesbyen we have preached victory over sin, being set free from sin, and becoming servants of righteousness. I believe this is needed. Both in Oslo and here in Bergen the brothers and sisters were testifying about their weaknesses in front of everybody. This uncommendable behavior has now been put right, so yesterday there was a completely different tone in the meeting. They spoke the Word of God and preached the virtues of Christ full of purpose. They can reveal their own weaknesses to God in their private prayers. We are thinking of going to Måløy on Wednesday evening. The private conversations have been the most blessed, both here and in Nesbyen. God has prepared everything for us, so it goes amazingly well. One after the other, the pieces are falling into place.

Now the brothers are fully aware that they must speak as the oracles of God, and they rejoice over this. I rejoice, too, for yesterday they were like zealous warriors in the front line. The first meeting we had here in Bergen was quite different, for they stood up and spoke about their shortcomings. There was neither vim, vigor, nor faith in it. We, as servants of the Spirit, are transformed into the same image from glory to glory. If we preach the virtues of Christ, these will certainly transform our life and being. Several brothers and sisters have taken time off work to come to brother Skutle’s house this afternoon. I also hope that brother X will now stop standing in front of the assembly and crying over all his defeats. He can do that somewhere other than on the battlefield.

Brother Ellefsen sends greetings. Well, dear brother, I’ll close now with the warmest greetings from your brother in the ministry, battling and striving together with you before the face of God,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 29, 1929 — # 208


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for the letter and manuscript I received today. Congratulations on the birth of your son. May he bring you great joy.

Brother Sigurd Bratlie wasn’t able to come with me to Denmark, so my wife came instead, and I think it was profitable. We had Bible studies a good part of the day and well into the night. Thora Windeløv, Elisabeth Christiansen, and Rikke Andreasen are doing well. They were exceedingly glad to have a visit. In Odense, we had informal meetings for three days.

In Copenhagen we were invited to a meeting at L.’s, where I was asked to say something. God’s Spirit had spoken powerfully to me the night before about what is written in Hebrews 11 regarding all that we understand and accomplish by faith. Therefore, great was my amazement when L. produced a paper on which it was written that the theme for the evening was to be Hebrews 11. God then gave me great grace and power to speak about everything we understand by faith. I spoke about victory over sin by faith, ruling by faith, being conformed to the image of Christ by faith, and the breaking down of sectarian divisions by faith, etc. By God’s grace I was able to speak everything He laid on my heart, clearly and without beating about the bush. The brothers and sisters rejoiced, and the others also appeared to be in agreement.

On Sunday we also had a blessed meeting in Copenhagen, where a young couple and a sister received light. Apart from this, I don’t know what God worked in people’s hearts.

X now wants to have a serious talk with one of the Christian leaders there about many things, among them the fact that the pastor of the assembly spends most of his time in Belgium. Well, now they’ll have to get along as best they can. We’ll see what comes out of it all. In any case, I know that the truth defends itself, and that no one can do anything against it. I also realize that there are openings in Denmark.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your brother and co-worker battling for the edification of the church,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 5, 1929 — # 209


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

I’m enclosing a letter from brother Bolsønes in Molde. He’s inviting you to a west coast conference in July or August. I’ve just returned from Skien and Brevik. The brothers and sisters from Kristiansand were also there.

Everything is going well. God’s grace and mercy are new every morning, and every morning we are one day older. Praised and honored be His name! It’s good to abide in lowliness when the Lord blesses and gives progress. In the low places one doesn’t have so far to fall, but it’s dangerous on the heights. By doing this and by keeping God’s commandments exactly, progress and blessings will increase even more. Zion’s stone of stumbling is down low, right by one’s feet.

May God continue to bless all your work richly. Be faithful to God to the end of your days, and your reward will be great. The many whom you have brought to righteousness will be to your honor and glory on that day. Certainly the opposition is great, but God’s power and grace are always greater. God can raise up helpers from His field in due time.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother in the same battle and the same victory,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 24, 1929 — # 210


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God give you power and mercy in your ministry!

Thank you for the letter and the songs. Since all opposition of any consequence has now been beaten back in Oslo, I believe that we are now more free to concentrate on an inner work, regarding both the salvation of sinners and inner edification. And that, I think, is what is needed now. I see God working in that direction. At the meeting last night we prayed for revival in Oslo. I feel an urgency in my spirit to pray for revival. I believe you would do well to work in that direction, just as you have already begun to do.

God is with you; only be strong and courageous. No bars of iron or gates of bronze will be too heavy or mighty for you. With self-control and in God’s power, all things can be regulated and balanced, so that one can always maintain stability just like in the days of the prophets of old.

My daughter Lydia needs constant attention. She can’t even sit on a chair without someone having to keep an eye on her, because she could easily have a convulsion and fall on the floor or hit herself against something. Therefore I have been looking after her while Pauline does the housework.

“Each has his share of burdens to bear.

Heaven alone is free from all care.”

But I wouldn’t have it any other way. That would be like robbing me of divine power. As far as I’m concerned, such circumstances are extremely interesting and appropriate. But for Lydia’s sake, I would much rather see her fit and healthy. She is 17 years old today. A childhood has faded away in suffering and total oblivion. May God show her double mercy on that day.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Copenhagen, March 5, 1931 — # 211


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

You’ve probably been waiting to hear from us. We’ve now had two public meetings and two Bible studies. Yesterday we had a blessed informal meeting, and a lot of people participated. The day before that, we had a public meeting about unity among the believers. On the Sunday evening that we arrived, we had a meeting where we spoke about “a gospel without commandments,” “Christ without the commandments,” “lawlessness,” and “obedience to the law.”

Brother Sigurd Bratlie has had the necessary maturity to cope with a difficult task. They love him dearly and respect all his decisions in difficult matters, because the man has both wisdom and insight.

There is now a stable core of established brothers and sisters in the church here. They have brother Bratlie as their leading brother and support, and Christ is their Head and Guide. Considering the amount of time that has elapsed, and given the circumstances, the situation here is especially good. On Friday and Saturday we’re going to cover the following subjects: “The body of flesh,” “the body of sin,” “the body of death”; “the works of the flesh,” “the deeds of the body,” “dead works,” “God’s works”; “the law of the Spirit,” “the law of sin,” “the law of death,” “the law in our members,” “the law in our mind”; “the old man,” “the new man,” and “the man of sin.” All this is being advertised.

People had already been warned about us by the time we arrived. Hallelujah! For us, the reproach of Christ is a tremendous treasure.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your devoted brother, well acquainted with reproach,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 1, 1931 — # 212


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace!

It’s nearly time for the conference, and we all hope that you’ll be able to come. You have your own special task and ministry at the conferences, both in the meetings themselves and in cultivating fellowship day and night. Therefore, we all hope you will do your best to come.

I hope you’re well and that things are going fine. I have finished reading three volumes of Wetterlund’s The Laws of the Spirit. I must say that he writes with a godly and upright spirit. It’s amazing how God has revealed so many things to him from the Prophets and Revelation.

I wonder if anything will come of the trip to Stockholm? I have a lot of painting to do right now. However, the will of God and His cause come first.

Things are going well in Oslo. God is blessing the church there in an amazing way. We had some good meetings together. I spoke about the baptism of the Spirit, the gifts, and their use.

I received a letter from brother Bratlie saying that it’s going well in Copenhagen.

In the face of opposition the whole work goes forward, always forward. May each individual member make the same kind of progress in inner godliness.

I looked in the Bible to find a word for you and immediately found Ezekiel 3, from verse 16.

Loving greetings both to you and your family from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 11, 1931 — # 213


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen, Peace!

Thank you for the card. God is working more than we can imagine. One really needs to be in quietness in order to see the workings of the Lord clearly. Last night, a few of the brothers and sisters were gathered for a feast at Ester Ellefsen’s. The doorbell rang, and there stood a man who wanted to speak to me. He was a chauffeur. He said, “I’ve been led by the Spirit of God to come here so that you can pray for me.” He had been in the church 16 years ago, but had fallen away. At that time he was in the Navy. He saw our names in Tønsberg Blad, and from then on became very restless. Now he has committed his life to God. He was afraid of meeting us. On the way over, he cried and prayed while he drove. His return was just like that of the prodigal son; there was rejoicing among us at the feast, and if we’d had a fatted calf, we would have killed and eaten it. He remembered us all, and reminisced about what we had said on different occasions. He had also received a letter from you. Later that night he drove us home and said he had never imagined he would be received in this way. All these years he’d been terrified of meeting any of us. But there was no one else in whom he had the same confidence.

I’ve been busy with my work since the conference, and at present have lots to do. I think it would be good for those in Oslo to be left alone for a while so they can use their own abilities and resources. We’ve had so many meetings lately. They need to have time to put things into practice as well, otherwise it will go badly with them in other ways. It doesn’t depend on our work alone; it’s essentially God’s work. He is number one and we are number two — or perhaps last on the list? We need rest in God and in the work, rather than work and restlessness. But when the Lord calls us to work, then let’s work with peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. I know you understand this just as well as I do, dear brother.

Loving greetings to you, your family, and the brothers and sisters, from your devoted brother in the same rest, confidence, and work,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 19, 1931 — # 214


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen, Peace!

Thank you for your letter received today together with the songs, which I’m returning along with my comments. Several of the songs are beautiful poems suitable for reading aloud. But for singing at a spiritual gathering they would have to be altered so that they were less dreamy. Feelings must be removed and realities brought to light.

I received a letter from old brother Carl Flodberg from Stockholm. He was really pleased with our visit and asked me to greet you warmly. He writes: “You just won’t believe what a tremendous joy it was for me to meet you, and also the brother that was with you; greet him warmly. I enjoy a continuous blessing, not just because I met the “sow-man,” but because I also met the “Man of eternity.” Hebrews 12:22–23. (Flodberg is the old lamplighter who is mentioned in Wetterlund’s The Laws of the Spirit. He is a god-fearing man and was one of Wetterlund’s best friends. It was good to hear from him.)

The meetings in Drøbak were exceptionally good. Several people have now been saved. Let us hope there will be good after-effects from the trip to Sweden. I gather from brother Flodberg’s letter and from others that the word of the cross has had an effect.

May you and your family have a blessed Christmas.

Loving greetings from your brother, abiding and progressing in the fire of cleansing from year to year,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 3, 1932 — # 215


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

My son Aksel and I will travel to Copenhagen next week, God willing. It would be very blessed and good if you could come, too.

I have read the book about David Petander, who was known as “The Wandering Priest.” It’s written by Seger, whom we also met while we were in Stockholm. Petander was an unusual man. He resigned as priest of Hernösand and traveled around with a rucksack in everyday attire, right up until his death in 1914 or 1915. He was born in 1875. He preached about the kingdom of heaven. They opened meeting halls and churches for him to have two or three meetings, but closed them again when they saw that he was causing dissension. In other words, some people received light, and they called that dissension.

I have written a little about him for Skjulte Skatter.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Fredericia, March 1, 1932 — # 216


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Well, now we’re here. Last night I lay awake for a long time, thinking about skipper Ivar Trondsen from Helgeråen. He was a fine man in every way, and discharged his duties to the complete satisfaction of the shipping company where he was employed. One day Ivar got married, and as he sailed the distant seas, he became overwhelmed by homesickness. He earned plenty of money, so his family had enough to live on. But one day when Ivar Trondsen’s ship was berthed in London, he received a letter saying that his beloved wife, Maria, was sick and confined to bed. The dear man suffered terribly as he constantly turned the matter over in his mind. Finally he decided to ask his company for two months’ leave. This was granted, and the first mate took over the skipper’s command. When his leave was over, Ivar Trondsen came back to his beloved ship and they sailed south. But all the time the skipper’s thoughts were drawn to his home. “Home, home. Oh, my dear home,” was the constant cry within him. His life’s vocation had all but become a hindrance to him. The next time they sailed to Europe, it was his eldest daughter who was ill. No! He just couldn’t stand it! Ivar once again sought leave, and again it was granted. Finally it became a matter of habit for him to apply for leave, since his family had come to mean more to him than his original calling and life’s work. To his final request for more leave, the company replied:



Captain Ivar Trondsen:



Your request of the 17th of this month is in hand, and you are hereby granted leave — permanently. As of the 1st of January the first mate will take over as captain of the ship. Thus we hope you will have ample time to be at home and care for your family.



Captain Trondsen was not an ungodly man; his desire was first and foremost to care for his own home. As the months went by, the money began to run out. People started whispering that this man must have a screw loose, giving up his life’s work in order to care for his family. Finally, the whole family ended up in the poorhouse. He sacrificed everything upon the altar of his family; things ended up in this way because his life’s vocation and work, which was his livelihood, had to yield to a so-called love for his family. That is what happens to everyone who does not, first and foremost, pay heed to his calling: he destroys his own family.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 25, 1932 — # 217


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

We are fighting and battling and suffering as best we can — all of us here as well. There is nothing new under the sun. Sin in the flesh is not destroyed, and therefore Satan is not dead. However, it is in this very battle that the values of life increase, and powers are crushed that are too mighty for those who are devoid of the Spirit to contend with. So, though death might seem like a glaring defeat, and suffering like Satan heaping scorn over years of wasted toil, I am content in this state nonetheless, because the grace of God extends to the conscious and unconscious realms. I know the way and I know where Jesus has gone, but in all the trials that come along the way, I know only in part, and in other areas I’m unenlightened. In these areas I’m in blissful ignorance, but that bliss is often shattered by the realities of the cleaving sword, and then many of these previously unknown thoughts become living realities. This knowledge, firsthand knowledge, brings pain which is often so great that the needle fluctuates on both sides of zero. You are no stranger to this, which is why I can write to you about it. Not that I’m trying to comfort you in your lonely winepress-battle, which must be completed, but rather I want to remind you of our common destiny in the brotherhood, when the needle quivers at either side of zero. You are entitled to this comfort, as well as the comfort in the endurance of Christ, all the way to eternal victory — through suffering — out of the suffering. Because, of course, the only way out of suffering is to go through suffering.

I hope you’ll be coming to the youth conference on July 1. Looking forward to seeing you. Greet your family. Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 15, 1933 — # 218


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Congratulations on the birth of your son. Many thanks for your letter received today with good news from Hønefoss. In all labor there is profit. In the fullness of time fruit will come. All opposition collapses when the fruit ripens, because life is stronger than death. We choose life, and therefore we conquer. Under a covering of reproach life shoots forth, just like plants do in a greenhouse.

Life is quiet and peaceful here. We’re having good meetings that are well attended. Surely something must come of all this!

We know that when the farmer has sown the seed, it grows because God gives growth. I believe that this work will progress. It has to succeed, because we preach the obedience of faith.

Over everything glorious is a covering. The amount of glory must be huge, since the covering of reproach is so great. We can be thankful for that. It would take a lot of tarpaulins to cover all the blessed things the Lord has revealed to us. We would dearly like to be together with others, but they are terrified of creeping under our tarpaulin.

Greet everyone in your home and all the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings to you from your brother battling in the same work, both at home and away from home,

J. O. Smith





Kristiansand, March 8, 1933 — # 219


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

I arrived here on Monday evening in the rain and slush. As I walked along carrying my suitcase in the dark and the rain, passing by places which I remembered from my childhood, many strange thoughts went through my mind and heart. I suddenly became so aware of the transience of life that I almost felt like sitting down and weeping. But life is more than death, and I had to pull myself together. Brother Frivold and his wife were really happy to see me. My lodgings here are so quiet; this is just the right place for me, because I love tranquility. I’ve had a steady diet of people, battles, and difficulties over the years, which is why it’s so blessed to be where it’s completely silent. When this quietness is coupled with God’s unspeakable rest, one is on Zion, raised far above the children of tumult.

Yesterday we had our first meeting. I spoke about righteousness and even more righteousness, that we are called to righteousness, and that everything else festers and works its way out of the body. The subject of money is an important one. I spoke to them about not making demands, but also that those who are better off should be alert so that they can see where help is needed and give it with a willing heart. I told them that this constant borrowing of money and running around trying to get people to guarantee personal loans, etc., must stop. I understood that this was needed, and they seemed relieved to hear it. Brother X testified about the water seeping in and out of his shoes. I told them that they mustn’t testify in a way that was tantamount to begging.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Long live zeal for God’s house! Throw out the dove-sellers! Overturn the tables and chairs! Drive out the moneychangers!

Loving greetings from your brother with the same mind and the same ministry,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 27, 1934 — # 220


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s grace and peace!

Hearty thanks for the postcards, the last of which was from Brevik. I’m glad you’re in Porsgrunn and around that area. There is undoubtedly much to do, and the laborers are few. But thanks be to God that He has given us something and someone to work with.

Since the trip to Denmark I haven’t been so well physically. I’m not able to take all these late night meetings, changes of climate and diet. It’s my age, naturally, that’s taking its toll. My spirit and interest are far stronger than my body, which is already feeling the effects of the wear and tear of time. Please pray that I can be healthy and alert, so I can continue to live and work according to God’s good pleasure.

You must also take heed that you don’t ruin your health with all these late night meetings. You have already reached the age where that is possible, and when it comes, it comes quickly. Remember that!!!

We are not so much in the evangelical sphere here as in the melting pot. When the cloud rested over the camp, Israel was to minister to the Lord.

People are demanding that we strike the rock time and again to get water. This is what they call an evangelical ministry, and preachers are willing to comply. It was for this very reason that Moses, the servant of the Lord, didn’t enter the land. The second time, he was to speak to the rock to get water. We must remember this in our ministry, for ours is a living, resurrected Savior. We must not let the murmuring of the people by the waters of Meribah affect us so we sink to the level of being ministers to the people in the outer court. If we do that, we only hinder ourselves in the race inwards, into the glorious land flowing with milk and honey.

Because the gifts of the Spirit have been misused, people are afraid to use the ones they have, and are afraid to seek new ones. There are not enough people who can care for the sick and who can pray with and for them. Several other things could also be mentioned. The point is that we must seek the spiritual gifts. 1 Corinthians 14:1.

May God bless your work, as well as that of brother Andreas Nilsen and all the others. Our labor is not in vain. It would be profitable, when preaching the Word of God, to let “the prophet” within us have greater prominence than “the preacher.” Speak to “the rock,” and it will speak to you. This is the spirit of prophecy.

Loving greetings to you, brother Andreas Nilsen’s family, and the brothers and sisters. Psalm 44:3–5.

Your brother resting in the obedience of faith,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 7, 1934 — # 221


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter and the manuscripts. The Easter conference is just around the corner. The years fly by so quickly. This year we thought that on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday we would have a prayer conference for brothers. This will give the brothers a chance to press in to God, and we need that sorely! It will have a good effect on the conference and on the different churches in general.

In Horten we’ve been having prayer meetings daily for over three weeks. What effect this has had on us and what it will do for others, God alone knows. But we have grown to enjoy praying, so it comes more naturally for us now. The young brothers have great power in their prayers. Several of them speak in tongues and interpret.

One evening a brother from Sandefjord came to Horten during a prayer meeting. He was powerfully gripped by the Spirit of prayer and began to speak in tongues so long and so powerfully that we were all amazed.

When we begin to pray it becomes manifest what sort of people we are — whether we are believers or unbelievers, whether we are willing to commit ourselves utterly to God or not.

There’s a conference in Brevik next Sunday, but it’s too far to go for so short a time. At conferences the young brothers are often merely passive listeners, with the older brothers taking up almost all the time. This is the sin of “the preachers” against the younger generation; the oldest should be as the youngest. The prophets, who give exhortation and comfort to the church (which can be done in 15 or 20 minutes), should come more to the fore, while the preachers who preach for one or two hours each, need to be pulled up sharply when they start repeating themselves. This isn’t difficult to understand. And for the listener it’s painfully obvious. Anything over and above what is edifying for the church is outside the laws of wisdom, even if that long-winded brother feels as if he’s in seventh heaven. However, when preaching almost exclusively to sinners, there must be a little more freedom. But if there are several brothers who have a word to sinners, they can’t all give their Sunday preach, otherwise they themselves will be found to be sinners, void of wisdom and understanding. That’s why the victory we have in our daily life must grow so that it can extend to “victory in the ministry.”

Loving greetings from your brother, who in many ways admires you greatly,

J. O. Smith





Oslo, May 5, 1934 — # 222


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter from Kristiansand. I’m glad that things went well there. I’m enclosing a number of letters that you’ll enjoy reading. I’ve had some correspondence with X, but his experience is the same as ours — he is misunderstood. I wrote that both you and I rejoiced over what he writes. This strengthened him and made him happy.

As you can see from the letters from Sigurd Bratlie and Andreas Nilsen, it’s going extremely well in Brevik. Brother Bratlie has great power in prayer, so I believe he will be very useful.

I believe we should attack the strongholds which are raised against us, on our knees. Pray down all resistance. Pray free the upright of heart, those who are trapped in the chains of the denominational system. No publicity, just let rumors prepare the way. That’s how it was in the days of Israel. Their enemies heard the rumors and were afraid. We have already begun to pray for revival. Yesterday, in Vogtsgate 35, many brothers prayed mightily for revival. I think you ought to conduct the meetings in Idrettens hus as prayer meetings with short testimonies and brief messages in between, so that people don’t get too stiff in their knees. It’s good here in Oslo. The prayer meetings are continuing in Horten. We’re praying for revival for sinners and that God will equip His witnesses with great power and wisdom.

Surely rivers of living water will soon flow over the wall, and I wouldn’t be surprised if a spiritual upheaval followed in their wake.

Loving greetings from your brother in the ministry, battling inside the wall,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 10, 1934 — # 223


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for our time together in Oslo and for the letters.

By God’s grace it’s going well with us. As usual, there are battles and struggles, but they are a part of our education. There is a great deal I cannot understand, yet I hear the thunder and see the lightning far off in the unknown. God’s way stretches far into the distance. His righteousness is boundless.

As you know, I was in Oslo for six days. We had Bible studies together. Unfortunately, despite all the work that has been done there, the brothers and sisters still lack insight into the ways of the inner life. I thought that they knew about everything, and so I was almost embarrassed to hold such Bible studies; but as far as I can see, this is exactly what is needed.

The lack of order and the lack of development in the work of the ministry are the greatest needs. These dreadfully long prayers in the meetings are absolutely deplorable, and that also applies to these long, drawn-out prayer meetings. It’s quite another matter in times of revival; then we have to do things differently. God is a God of order, and everything among us should be done to edification.

Yes, dear brother, you know this yourself, but now this has to be put into practice. When this obedience is fulfilled in the church in one place, we can go on — to those on the other side of the sea.

If we only work in an outward way, or too much in that direction, the inner life of the church is weakened. It is, after all, this life which is the core of all our activity. Jesus walks in the midst of the seven golden lampstands. It is to the church that God adds souls, and for this reason the church should be in order.

A lot could be said about this, and when we are aware of it, I believe that we can be perfected much more in the work of the ministry in this area. May God grant us grace, strength, and wisdom to this end.

Your brother — toiling, yearning, struggling, and crawling away from sin, death, and hell toward light, life, and the wisdom of God,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 9, 1934 — # 224


Dearest Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace!

Hearty thanks for your two letters. Our work in the Lord is not in vain, even though for a time it can appear to be so. Let us just consider what God has done over the years: our children have been saved; the churches round about the country are flourishing and bearing fruit. In Denmark, too, the seed is springing up and growing day and night. It has been sown in America. We can rejoice over all this. And what does the future hold? Our children and grandchildren will pass on the seed. The children in the church will continue to bear fruit and pass on the seed far into the future. God’s kingdom come, and His will be done. Although we are few, God’s power to bring forth new life is great in those few. Therefore, do not grow weary, dear brother, but continue on the same course at the same speed as always.

I often think of Hallingdal. There is a spirit of revival in the valley, and there are several who have begun to work up there.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings from all of us here from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 14, 1934 — # 225


Dear Brother Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you for your letter with suggestions for the New Year’s conference.

A conference is a church meeting — that is to say, a meeting for the whole church. Anyone who is led by the Spirit to speak can do so. Here preachers have no advantage over those who stammer. Therefore, we should avoid lofty themes on which only one or two can expound, while all the others remain in their seats, only to say “Amen” at the end, just like the sexton in church. So then, away with “the preacher”! Make room for the slow of speech! Make room for the apostles, prophets and teachers, who can encourage those who are shy and retiring. Let the least receive the greatest honor, then truly it will be the church’s meeting and conference.

I would really like to hear how things are going in Nesbyen.

Greet the brothers and sisters and your family. Loving greetings from your “non-preaching” brother who is striving in the love of the Spirit for others’ salvation,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 15, 1935 — # 226


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter from Bergen. I’m really glad to hear you’re traveling around.

My son Aksel and Elihu Pedersen are now working in Flisa, where there is great enthusiasm for our meetings. Several people are receptive to the Word, and things look promising.

My mother-in-law died on January 8, 86 years old, full of faith in her Savior. Her funeral was held at our meeting hall, and we had a good memorial feast in the evening. She had lived a godfearing life from her youth, so many good things were said in remembrance of her, and there were testimonies thanking God for everything.

We’re having meetings here as usual. I believe all these meetings have more of an effect than we can imagine, especially on the children and young people. When they come into contact with other people, they understand the spiritual inheritance they’ve received.

Take care of yourself, dear brother. May God richly bless your work, so that His light may shine clearly unto salvation and sanctification.

Greet the brothers and sisters, and greetings to you from your brother sharing in humiliation, dishonor, and glory,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 12, 1935 — # 227


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Thank you very much for the letter which I received today and the songs I received yesterday. I’m afraid I’ve marked “not suitable for printing” on practically every single one. We can’t sing doctrines, exhortations, etc. Songs which are too long and have a chorus as well, should be shortened. Battle songs and songs of praise are what we need. We can learn much from David’s psalms. After one has gone through great battles, it’s easy to compose a song. I think of Luther’s “A Mighty Fortress Is Our God,” or Brorsons’s “Arise Ye Christians, Arm Yourselves.” However, if one just sits in comfort and fabricates a lot of songs at one’s leisure, this will be reflected in the content. Very few songs stand the test of time — and that applies to our song book, too. Therefore, we must be stricter about what we print. When composing songs, we should make them with distinct lines of thought, so that one thing can be easily distinguished from another. Then we won’t have to spend time studying the text while singing the song. Besides, as you know, we are unlearned people in this kind of thing, so I cannot and will not say much more about it. The important thing is that each of us praise God in every way, to the best of our ability.

Loving greetings with a “mannacorn”: Isaiah 25:1–4. I hope that in the end we will be able to say as David: 1 Chronicles 23:25–26.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 29, 1935 — # 228


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect peace!

Hearty thanks for your very good letter about life and progress in Oslo. Several people there seem promising.

Skjulte Skatter is now entering its 25th year. For this occasion, I’ve written a very short article.

“Little strokes can fell great oaks.” I hope the strokes are hard and strong enough so the oaks can really be felled. As you are well aware, no one can do anything against the truth. I’m thankful for that. In the midst of all the confusion and lies, something lasting exists, something real, something unshakable, a Mount Zion — God’s Word.

During all these years of spiritual warfare, we have seen very little of our enemies. God has driven them away with hornets and rumors and fear. That’s the way it is, and that’s the way it will be, so that God’s Word can be fulfilled in us. Therefore, it’s just as it is written in the song:

“The battle is on in the camp of the lost,

And vict’ry is certain for God’s faithful host.”

When war breaks out naturally, according to God’s will, we are on the safe side. We are on the victory side in the face of reproach. Even if we appear to lose the battles, we still win the war.

I received a letter from my son Aksel. They’ve had meetings in Drammen, Hokksund, Vestfossen, and Mjøndalen. In Mjøndalen there was a woman who said that my brother Aksel was the first one who came to Mjøndalen and preached about the baptism of the Spirit.

A hearty greeting from your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 14, 1935 — # 229


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good postcard received today.

When people are determined not to understand and are more interested in twisting things around, then they are hitting their heads against a brick wall. [Brother Aslaksen’s book] Seventy Ways to Heaven speaks for itself; it needs neither defense nor recommendation. If someone doesn’t understand the book, something or other must be lacking in that person’s life. Thank you for the book What It Means to Be a Christian. Although it’s written for sinners and beginners, one must reckon that it’s also strong food for many believers. Everything relating to the truth is “too hard.”

I’ve read carefully through all three of your books, and I can’t find anything that could cause offense. On the contrary, I find that they are full of God’s light and knowledge. Therefore, I’m especially glad that they are now being published. They will help seeking souls, and of course it is these we want to reach.

Heartfelt greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Brevik, February 20, 1936 — # 230


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for the manuscripts. As you can see, I’m out traveling. I’ve been in Fredrikstad, Sandefjord, Porsgrunn, and Brevik. The brothers are maturing spiritually everywhere. One can rightly say that in this part of the country the fields are white for harvest but the laborers are few. Frankly, Andreas Nilsen has more than enough work. More and more places are opening up. The warnings against us don’t have any effect anymore. God’s grace and power conquer everything. There are far too few laborers. At the conference in Horten on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday, there will be prayer meetings and Bible studies for brothers.

There is going to be a greater need for the “priestly ministering” of the gospel of God among the perfect (Romans 15) if the whole work is not to come to a halt. But great grace is needed in this ministry. May God equip servants in these days so that the offerings of the Gentiles in our country can be acceptable to God.

I’m really thankful to God for the young brothers who are out working with the gospel. They’re doing a good job. This also applies to the leading brothers in their respective local churches. There has never been such progress and so many open doors as there are now. God be praised and honored for all this. I’ve been in doubt about whether we should declare war on every front, but God’s commandment that says we are not to resist an evil person wins the day. Perhaps it’s this silence which opens doors and has the greatest impact.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your co-worker in Christ,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 26, 1936 — # 231


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

Grace and peace in Christ Jesus!

Thank you so much for your good letter I received today. God’s ways are amazing, and His paths are peace. I came home on Monday from Brevik, where we had blessed meetings. We were also in Langesund, Porsgrunn, Herøya, Skien, and Skottfoss. In Skottfoss we had the use of a large community hall. There were many people there, and great grace was upon the meeting. Many believers got something to think about. In Skien it was the same. Brother Øvrum testified in such a way that the bishops of this country would have been envious of him.

There are new faces everywhere we go. It was as if all opposition had been blown away, and we used their own weapons to further clear the air. Not a single voice was raised against us. In Brevik we had Bible studies of a deeper nature, and the brothers rejoiced. We started the trip in Fredrikstad, then went on to Tønsberg and Sandefjord, where we had a good time with brother Isak Evensen. The brothers and sisters got there as soon as they could.

We can ask: “Who knows what kind of fish there are in this big net which will soon be full?” Only God knows! They rejoice in the light as long as they hear it and see it, but when they themselves have to act or make a decision based on their own understanding, I’m often surprised how greatly mistaken they can be. That’s when things go wrong. Is this because, in the depths of their heart, they are not really saved??? Are the hidden thoughts and intents of their heart not with God? If that’s the case, leprosy can indeed break out at any time. In all likelihood, that is why Paul said: “For they all seek their own.” This was what disqualified people from the work of the ministry. When I leave the presence of a spiritual brother who understands practically everything, and then go straight to a carnal brother, it’s a suffering for the spirit, because everything is dragged down to a carnal level and taken to mean something quite different.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. When one is out traveling, it becomes quite plain that there are few workers.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 14, 1937 — # 232


Dear Brother Elias Aslaksen,

God’s perfect grace and peace!

Thank you very much for your two good articles to Skjulte Skatter enclosed with the letter. I have to say with Tersteegen: “I am stupid and hope to become even more stupid.” It is certain I’ll attain to this even without hoping. When you give yourself to spiritual things, you lose practically all awareness and understanding about things on the earth. Quite simply, one becomes stupid, yet wise enough to overcome the world and the things that are in it. That’s the way it is, and it is that wisdom which frees and redeems us from the earth and people. I’m glad I’m retired so I don’t have to compete. Perhaps by descending through the open door of lowliness we can become so invisible that the place we leave behind will hardly be worth fighting for. That is surely the most perfect way. Then we’ll leave only the words of the Master behind us:

“Follow me.”

Warmest greetings from your brother, sharing in the ministry and the suffering,

J. O. Smith





Ålesund, December 31, 1914 — # 233


Dear Brother Theodor Ellefsen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your good letter which came today. It’s so good to hear about your labor in the Lord, and that He is with you, opening the door for His Word. You know that the kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed, which indeed is the smallest of all seeds; but when it grows, it becomes so large that the birds of the air come and nest in its branches. That’s how it goes with us as well. We were alone, misunderstood by everyone; but now, thanks be to God, the seed is growing.

I went to an assembly here in Ålesund a number of times, but the outcome was just the same as when Paul went to the synagogues. After a while he had to leave, taking the disciples with him. Many people in their time have received the Spirit of God, but they haven’t really understood that they were to receive the Word in the Holy Spirit. 1 Thessalonians 1:6. This is a consistent lack everywhere. I was also in two other places where they urged me to be sure to come again. To begin with, it seems as if the Word is like beautiful music to them, but once it begins to tear down and to build up, resistance usually comes.

God has spread us along the coast in an amazing way. May He Himself bless our work. I rejoice over the two sisters you wrote about and also the two brothers, one of whom has traveled south. God is doing amazing things; however, the fact is that they are very weak to begin with, so it is probably difficult for them to resist the influence of other spirits.

It’s been a long time since I last spoke to you, and I long to talk to you face to face.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Måløy, March 8, 1915 — # 234


Dear Brother Theodor Ellefsen, God’s perfect peace!

Here we’ve had meetings which have drawn a full house, but now I have stopped having them in order to speak with the few about the inner life in God. The deeper inward one goes, the smaller the flock becomes.

My father passed away in Christ Jesus. His last words were: “I want to be more filled with Him who is the way, the truth, and the life,” and then he passed quietly away. The funeral was held three days later, so I was unable to travel the distance of 500 miles to get there in time. That was a hard blow. During his lifetime he was zealous for God, and his longing was to be godly. True, he was not able to lead us into a deeper spiritual life; nonetheless he showed us the way toward it. May God bless his spirit and his work. He was in a class by himself, and the lowly and oppressed always received faithful support and help from him. Let us now use our lives in the service of God, and let us continue to put on “the new man” as “the old man” is destroyed.

I’m glad that the brothers are continually fighting faithfully in their respective localities. Apparently Ole Skiaker’s illness has taken a turn for the worse. The world is dark and narrow, and it’s good to be journeying toward a better home, as my father wrote in his song. My deepest desire, more than ever before, is to lay aside every weight and run the race. I must say together with Paul that I count all things loss for the excellence of the knowledge of Christ Jesus, my Lord.

When Christ, who is our life, appears, we shall be like Him and shall see Him as He is. Hallelujah! Then we’ll meet our loved ones. Let us always, for the rest of our lives, live according to God’s will and not according to human desires. Soon everything will be over, and we shall receive our reward according to our faithfulness and our work.

God has been with you and blessed your work. Always take this to heart: continue in the work and in steadfastness, so your reward can be great in the everlasting habitations. Pray for me that the Word of the Lord can make progress and that I can preach the Word as it ought to be preached, in purity and dignity, as the apostle exhorts us.

Loving greetings. Your devoted

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Haugsholmen, December 31, 1915 — # 235


Dear Brother Theodor Ellefsen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your good letter which I received some time ago.

You’ve now had a long tour of duty in Finnmark again.

Brother Thorleif Hansen was in Måløy for about eight days, andnow he is in Ålesund, where he spent Christmas. Christmas Eve and the following days we were in Måløy, where there’s a little assembly now. Though they are weak, they love the truth. Brother Hansen had clearly strengthened them in faith and bound them more firmly together. On the 29th and 30th of December we werein Ålesund where, together with Brother Hansen, I attended two meetings. We spoke about how it is possible to rejoice in the light for a time without bearing the fruit of the light, but that now we must work in the light, so that others can taste the goodness which is in us, brought forth by Jesus Christ our Lord. When different truths are illuminated, people rejoice; but the real test comes when they are required to follow the light. Nevertheless, even on this point they received the Word, although we sensed it was hard for them.

In Bergen, I haven’t found anyone with whom I could speak, but on two occasions drunken men have started up a conversation with me about their lives. Perhaps this is an indication from the Lord that in this town we should begin with those who have sunk lowest. Will you keep this in mind when you come to Bergen?

Tonight is the last night of the year — an awful year for a land at war, but a blessed year for us. God has done great things this year; therefore we will praise Him.

In Ålesund, they rented a room for brother Hansen. I visited him there one afternoon, and we spoke a great deal together. I have never had much chance to talk to him before. He’s a very zealous and straightforward young man who’s doing a thorough work. The important thing is to persevere with those with whom we are working, and not let go of them before God has established them and Christ is formed in them.

It would be a great joy for me to hear from you. I wish you a blessed New Year, and thank you for the one gone by.

Loving greetings.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





To the Conference in Drøbak — Pentecost, 1916 - # 236


Beloved Brothers and Sisters in the Lord,

God’s peace!

In my absence, brother Ellefsen will convey my heartfelt greetings, as well as my prayers for a blessed conference in Drøbak.

Some of our precious brothers and sisters from west Norway will meet those from the east for the first time, and my prayer to God is that the fellowship that we by God’s grace have already established before the conference will, in the course of the conference, be more firmly established and be found genuine.

During the past few years God has worked in many ways, far beyond what we could have imagined. Many have desired to crush us in our infancy in the Lord, in order to bring to naught the knowledge of God. But God was with us even when things were at their worst, and today we can praise the Lord because the power of our opponents is crushed, enabling us to meditate on the law of the Lord in peace.

If we are to retain the land we have won, each of the brothers and sisters must be pillars in the temple of God in the place where they are, so that, together with the others, they form an impenetrable wall in the fellowship of the Spirit in the bond of peace. For this is our fellowship, written not with ink, but by the Spirit of the living God.

We are Christ’s and no longer our own. Just as Christ was given as our Head and as a gift to the church, we are given as gifts to one another. Therefore each one of us must serve the others in a way that maintains and furthers the unity of the Spirit in the bond of peace. If anyone breaks this law, he reveals himself as a transgressor in the church.

To the extent that He has been able to lead us, God has given us light in His Word and revealed the mysteries of Christ to us. Therefore, it is our duty to defend what He has entrusted to us, just as nations today defend the land of their forefathers. The apostles and many of the saints have given their lives for this glorious Word of God, and we cannot expect to come through the world victoriously without having to battle.

Therefore, do not fear those who can kill the body but cannot kill the soul; rather, fear Him who is able to destroy both soul and body in hell.

Right from the time when the flock began to grow, there have been those who have made comparisons between what we preach and what is preached inside the camp. These people have had a certain longing for the camp and have been drawn to it, because in the camp they can serve the tabernacle. This is because they don’t have victory. Again and again they need to be washed with pure water; and because of this, less can be said about walking on the new and living way, where the third witness — the witness of the blood — comes into its own.

It’s not the fault of the doctrine that some people are like this; it’s because of their own apathy and unwillingness to lay down their lives.

“We have an altar from which those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat.” When a person’s entire spiritual walk consists solely of an outward cleansing of the body, this is called “serving the tabernacle.” Such people have no right to eat of the altar which is within the veil, neither are they able to do so.

Just as some returned to the weak and beggarly elementary doctrines, there are those among us who have shown a tendency to go back to serving the tabernacle.

Thanks be to God that there are faithful souls who esteem the reproach of Christ as the greatest of riches, who are quite satisfied with their lot outside the camp — where He is, and where we are nourished from the altar of His flesh and His blood, of which Jesus Himself says that this is truly meat and drink.

As long as the first tabernacle still stands, the Holy Spirit testifies that the way into the sanctuary is not yet revealed. But inside the veil, the Spirit testifies, together with the water and the blood, of deep rest — the rest of God.

My greetings to the conference with John 9:7 and verses 35–39, also with Hebrews 13:13–14.

Heartfelt greetings in the love of Christ.

Yours,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Ålesund, June 27, 1916 — # 237


Dear Brother Theodor Ellefsen,

God’s peace!

Thank you for your two very good letters which were a great joy to me, the last one being about the conference in Lillestrøm. I believe these conferences are going to mean a great deal for the future. One gets a little frightened of going too far, because experience has taught us that chastening will follow. Several of the brothers and sisters have such a good understanding that they now know how to discern in different matters. It’s really good to know that no single individual, no matter who he is, can tear down God’s building. Not that I believe anyone has wanted to do this but by not being careful, one can give room to carnal people, who really do want to disturb the whole house. Such elements must be kept in check. If anyone wants to defend their behavior, that’s his own business, but to do so would be harmful to himself. The church is now so large that those who are leaders must show firmness. This, too, is required of them. I believe the result of the whole conference points in the direction I have mentioned, a fact which is noticeable at least for the more spiritual ones. I’m not anxious about what has been built up, but rather about those people who are destroying themselves by wanting to tamper with this building. If the work isn’t able to stand, let it fall; but let it fall at the hands of the knowledge of God, which is mighty for pulling down strongholds. But if the building has been built through the knowledge of God, it is madness to want to destroy it by carnal rhetoric. This, of course, is as futile as a sparrow trying to peck a hole in armored plating.

My desire is that in the future everyone would work together in one spirit toward the same goal, which is to present every person perfect in Christ Jesus. Until now, one has to admit that things have gone fairly well, despite great opposition and many battles, because God has been with us.

Of late I have thought a lot about reckoning oneself alive to God in Christ Jesus. Romans 6:11.

Many thanks for your card and our conversation in Haugesund. It was a blessed time together. Our citizenship is in heaven; therefore, we should be able to rejoice together with citizens of the same country.

Loving greetings from

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, July 14, 1918 — # 238


Dear Brother Theodor Ellefsen,

Peace!

Thank you for your two good letters, the latter of which I received today. I had heard you were sick, so I’m really glad to hear you are getting better. I’ve had Spanish flu the past few days, but now I’m recovering. In Horten this sickness has raged terribly, and many have died.

Yes, you can be certain that I understand your letter. There is indeed plenty to do, and I’m happy that in your discernment of things you are able to hit the nail squarely on the head. It is right that you tackle things promptly and directly, for this creates respect. Exercise yourself in being a servant of the new covenant, for the Spirit. Put everyone in their rightful place. If anyone, in his imagination, is hovering up in the high places, let him know where he really belongs, for such treatment makes people so reasonable and easy to deal with. Reluctance to speak can be a hiding place for Satan; actually, it’s vanity. People do not want to expose themselves, because they want to appear to be more than they really are, which of course would be revealed if they opened their mouths. This is hidden pride.

Aksel and Helga are now in Sweden. I’ve had a letter from them. The young people from Drøbak were here on Sunday as well as some brothers and sisters from Sandefjord. Those from Drøbak are becoming more steadfast as time goes on.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 10, 1935 — # 239


My dear Son Aksel,

Peace!

Thank you for the letter and the manuscript received today. I must say it’s a great joy for us to hear how the work is progressing. I know myself how hard it is up there. That was an amazing Scripture you got from Job 12:22. God truly uncovers deep things out of darkness, and He brings the shadow of death to light. This cynical, cold, and callous spirit must be brought into the light so that it is no longer able to remain hidden. It loses the power to hold on to its prey, so the soul is liberated. Hidden things come forth from darkness. The Prince of Darkness is forced to release his prey. All this happens as a result of preaching the gospel of Christ. Be thankful that you, by God’s grace, have partaken of such a glorious, soul-searching gospel. We cannot see all the hidden work which takes place in people’s hearts, but it’s quite certain that a great deal does take place in the inner consciousness of the soul. We are sowing, others are joining in the work, and then what is hidden will be brought fully into light. So our labor in the Lord is not in vain. With this faith and in this power we can be servants for the Spirit. Remember that!

Here things continue as usual. Easter is approaching, and we are going to have some prayer meetings. There’s much work to be done in many places, as you said, but the workers are few. I think it’s a miracle of God that so much has come of it all. All of us here greet you warmly. Greet the brothers and sisters.

Your father,

J. O. Smith





Horten, August 1, 1935 — # 240


My dear Son Aksel,

God’s perfect peace!

Thank you very much for your very good letter with all the good news, which I just received.

It’s amazing how God blesses. I was thinking today that although it has taken many years to prepare servants, things are now going forward rapidly because there are many who can work. I believe it’s good for all of you to act as though the opposition didn’t even exist, for you are waging God’s wars. The only thing that has relevance for the future is death over the old man. You see how hypocritical people can be, having been preachers all their lives. Preach what God’s Spirit is preaching: “If Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness.”

Only the word of the cross against the old man is of any value. This destroys the works of the devil. Anything else is definitely not the full gospel. A complete gospel contains a complete death of sin in the flesh, and that must be preached. There is nourishment in this. Jesus said He gave His flesh for the life of the world. “For My flesh is food indeed, and My blood is drink indeed.” In this way the people of God receive nourishment. Where there is food, people will gather, just as you are now experiencing. Where the carcass is, there the eagles will be gathered together. The body of Christ is the true carcass; it is food indeed. Proclaim this boldly wherever you go, even if Satan rages, for victory is yours.

God will reveal to you how long you should remain where you are now and where you should go afterwards. The Chief Shepherd is in command. Personally, He has been my leader all these years, since the time I came to any understanding at all. You can see today that the leading has been divine and not human. Therefore, all honor belongs to Him. Our honor, then, consists of hearing His voice; and that is what you need to do too, dear Aksel. This brings true balance in life. I know that you already hear, but exercise yourself to do so even more. Do nothing from your own human inclination, for that is the way of the flesh.

Let this trip and your faithfulness be a “pattern” for the young brothers growing up, so they can see that it pays to be faithful, and that faithfulness is the only thing God will reward. For I believe that the success of your work for the gospel will be greater than we can now comprehend, and not only your success, but also the success of those who follow in your footsteps and who have all of you as examples. Always seek God’s honor, and this will come to pass.

I will probably go to Brevik this Sunday. There is real progress taking place in that district.

Greet the precious brothers who are together with you. Preach the cross against your own flesh at all times; then it will be easy to preach the same against others’ flesh. This is the mystery of faith and of the cross. This is the way, “the food,” and the life.

Loving greetings from all of us here. We were all happy for your letter.

Your father,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 18, 1906 — # 241


Dear Brother X,

Thank you very much for your postcard. You say that God is also able to heal the body. Yes, that is certain. He can heal it and He can break it down, for He possesses all power in heaven and on earth. But rest in God is mighty to drive nervousness away. Spiritual strength also strengthens the body, since body, soul, and spirit belong together. When I came to rest in my spirit, my body also came to rest. However, if our spirit is restless, we’ll be running around all over the place. But whoever believes will not act hastily. He needs neither to bring Christ up nor down; but He is near in the heart and in the mouth. Then there’s no need to run around. Do you really know what it means to have given up everything for Christ’s name’s sake? You know that you ought to give up everything, but I’m asking you if you have sold everything in order to win Christ. If you have done this, then it’s not possible for you to be nervous. He who seeks wisdom needs to limit his activities, for he knows that wisdom comes by opportunity of leisure. It’s not wisdom to destroy oneself. Many things can be motivated by nothing more than a strong desire to see completed the things one has personally initiated. As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God. This leading is not the kind that makes us nervous. Therefore you can safely trust God in everything. Then your rest and your confidence will be great. You will experience the peace and joy which surpass all understanding, and I would be surprised if this nervousness didn’t disappear. I don’t have much else to write about at this point, since you haven’t opened your heart to me so I can know how you are — except that you are not well.

You will most likely have much to battle through before you reach the point where you can speak plainly what the Spirit of God wants spoken, without respect of persons. This will cause you to be hated by all men. Are you willing to do this? Are you willing to be faithful to the light in everything — regardless of the cost? If you are, then Hallelujah! I have always appreciated the spirit in you, for there is something genuine and honest about you. Press on in the truth, and you will become like a new, sharp threshing sledge. Do not fear, but make use of the light that is given you, so that you can be helped by more light.

May God fill you with peace and joy to such a degree that, as far as you are concerned, the word “nervous” can disappear from the language. Or if you wanted to use it, then it would only be as a recollection of something that no longer exists.

Your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 14, 1908 — # 242


Dear Brother in the Lord, X,

In your letter you wrote that you have only been to one meeting at Y’s since you came home. It is most unfortunate to draw back from your ministry and, just like King Oscar II, stop serving. If we do that, we’ll receive the same treatment he received — dismissal. The angel of the church in Ephesus received the Spirit’s testimony that he had labored much for Jesus’ name’s sake, yet had not grown weary. We, too, must retain this testimony of the Spirit so that our weariness does not become a judgment upon us. Concerning our body and sickness, we know that when Christ died, His body died also; consequently, our bodies are dead in the death of Christ. The body is dead because of sin. Romans 8:10. We are now on resurrection ground, beyond the cross; therefore the body belongs to the Lord, and it is dead. Our body must be used for the purposes of the ministry, because the body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the body. 1 Corinthians 6:13. There are different ministries, but the same Lord. It’s written that He Himself took our infirmities and bore our sicknesses (please read Matthew 8:16–17), which tells us that He bore the whole body into death. When the body was brought into death, all of our sicknesses were brought into death along with the body. Jesus didn’t suffer constantly from headaches, scarlet fever, diphtheria, toothaches, cholera, etc., but He brought into death that body which could become sick and in that way destroyed sickness. I have never heard of a dead body becoming sick.

In light of all this, it should be evident that the body is dead and belongs to the Lord. Therefore, the Lord can do whatever He wants with the body. When we are sick, this will be related to the fact that there are evil spirits over which we don’t have complete victory. Jesus’ death in the body removes every evil spirit from the body. But an incomplete victory makes it possible for the body to suffer from sickness. You say that your capacity for spiritual labor is greatest when you are well physically. In other words, your sickness is a direct hindrance to your ministry in the Lord. This hindrance ought to be removed.

The world is full of evil spirits. One day recently, Z mimicked a helmsman who is partially blind in one eye. Z’s eye immediately began to swell and take the same shape as the helmsman’s eye. The last time I saw Z, the worst of the swelling had gone down because he had judged himself, but his eye was still not back to normal. He had allowed himself to be used by an evil, mocking spirit, because in the Spirit of God he could never have mocked. Paul drove out a spirit of divination. Acts 16:18. In the same way, people have to make use of a spirit of lying in order to get the power to lie, a spirit of stealing to commit theft, and a spirit of vanity in order to be vain, etc., etc.

There are also many good spirits: the Spirit of prayer, the Spirit of revelation, the Spirit of wisdom, the Spirit of counsel, the Spirit of might, the Spirit of judgment, etc. He will be a Spirit of judgment to those who sit in judgment and the Spirit of might to those who turn back the battle at the gates.

From this we can learn that if we give in on any point, we allow ourselves to be overcome. Or if we toy with any of these evil spirits, they will gain a foothold in our body and cause disorder. You can see at a glance when a person is influenced by a spirit of vanity.

However, I don’t believe that you have completely surrendered yourself to a spirit of vanity, but I do believe that to a certain degree you admire the things that are highly esteemed in this world.

By doing this you allow this spirit to gain access, and this in turn will have an effect on your body.

There is nothing else for you to do but to firmly resist this spirit in faith, so grace and thereby health can take its place. Until you get victory over this spirit, getting well is out of the question, because if God made you well before that, then with your healthy body you would give yourself over even more to the power of the spirit of vanity. To a certain degree, your sickness is preventing this, so spiritually speaking it’s more of an advantage to you than a disadvantage. That is to say, it’s an advantage for you personally; but actually the situation is desperate, because the ministry is suffering, and this results in the fruit being less plentiful.

From the moment you let this law apply — the body is for the Lord, and the Lord for the body — you’ll find that healing will flow through your body, because it’s more profitable both for you and for God’s cause that you are healthy. But if you allow the spirit of vanity to reign, prepare yourself for sickness, for God is no respecter of persons.

Because I know you love the truth, I dare to write to you so boldly, because love of the truth can save us from death.

Try this spiritual remedy. If this isn’t the right medicine, then the Lord has not spoken in this matter.

But if it does help, and you become healthier and healthier as you crush vanity under your feet, then the Lord has spoken, and you will be strengthened in your faith and better equipped for the work of the ministry.

Heartfelt greetings from your brother in Christ,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Haugesund, September 27, 1916 — # 243


Dear Brother X, God’s peace!

Thank you for your letter and for the time we had together in Bergen. It was a joy to be able to speak with you about the things that pertain to life, things that are eternal. Think — eternal life!

What a glorious gift! If, for a short time, we endure sufferings because we are tempted, God will give us an eternal weight of glory. The flesh wars against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh, so that we do not do the things we want. Nothing good dwells in my flesh. Therefore this middle wall of partition, this enmity which was broken down in Christ, must also be broken down in me. After this breaking down has taken place, the new creation comes forth which is created according to God in truth, righteousness, and holiness. In Christ Jesus only a new creation avails anything. Therefore, if we are always delivered into the death of Christ, it is in order that the life of Christ may be manifested in our mortal flesh. It depends on our faithfulness in the Spirit. Most men will proclaim each his own goodness. But who can find a faithful man?

Brother Ellefsen has found a brother on board the Viking. Things aren’t going so quickly, and the numbers aren’t large, but thanks be to God there is progress. The message of the cross is the power of God for us who are being saved; but alas, most people are enemies of the cross of Christ.

Greetings in the love of Christ from your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Valkyrien — Ålesund, February 21, 1917 — # 244


Dear Brother X, Peace!

Praise God! He does mighty things for His name’s sake. The brothers and sisters are doing well here. It was a great blessing to see them again last Sunday after being away for a month. If we keep ourselves pure from the vessels of dishonor, we will be vessels for honor, sanctified and useful for the Master, prepared for every good work.

“Beware, above all else, of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy!” [Norw.] People try to bring about unity and create peace and well-being without suffering — without blood. But that will never succeed. It’s only the whitewasher’s big brush covering everything up. God sends a rainstorm, and the naked realities are once again exposed. We have no use for hypocrisy and whitewashing. We need the truth and the power of God. We have no use for “peace, peace” when there is no peace. We need to see ourselves as we are, so that we can become poor, blind, and naked; because it is to the poor in spirit that God reveals His salvation. “You are already full! You are already rich! You have reigned as kings without us!” Paul writes. What a pitiful condition; and this is how it was with the church in Laodicea also.

When the Scriptures say that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwells no good thing, it doesn’t make me any better if someone tells me that everything about me is fine. Let’s face reality, so that we are not deceived. Sin is to be condemned in the flesh. The deeds of the body are to be put to death by the Spirit, because a new and living way has been consecrated for us through the veil, that is, His flesh. He not only came by water; He came by water and blood. The blood cleanses us within, just as the water cleanses us without. “But if we walk in the light as He is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin.” The cleansing John speaks of here is not from sins we have committed — sins which are the fruit of yielding to temptation, for we walk in the light. But it’s that cleansing from sin which comes through the judgment of the light, cleansing from the sin that dwells within. Light condemns sin in the flesh, and we agree with that verdict, for the time has come for judgment to begin at the house of God — with us. This is the judgment, that the light has come into the world.

God willing, we will probably go to Haugsholmen on Saturday.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 7, 1921 — # 245


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you so much for your good letter which I received today. At one time in my life God sent me to the west of Norway on board a ship; it doesn’t look as if it will be so easy to go there again. I’m grateful to God for the time I was among the dear brothers and sisters there, and I’m glad that you are continuing faithfully in the same footsteps of faith.

Here in Horten our living rooms are becoming too small for our meetings. I’m glad we will soon have a meeting hall. We have already begun to move stones onto the site. I’m enclosing a blueprint of the building.

As for Y, she assumed an authority far beyond what I consider to be right and divine. My work down through the years has been to teach people to fear God and to serve one another, so the greatest becomes as the least. I have sought to practice this by God’s grace. Every rod of authority, other than the one which results from godly fear, we have sought with all our might to crush, wherever we might have encountered it.

Think about this carefully, and you will discover what is right. May God bless your conference at the New Year. Greet the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 7, 1923 — # 246


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your two good letters. You say you’ve received light over many things recently. Thus you can see that these conflicts you’ve been through have brought you and others more light. So be thankful to God for everything. God is extremely zealous for His church. The least fault is punished. So be careful in all your conduct, for God treats us all impartially. As long as the chastening lasts, things look grim; but don’t let this frighten you, for soon things will be brighter than ever before. Chastening yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it. Remain in quietness while this is taking place, and wait on the Lord; He will show you the way out. The more “fuss” one makes, the longer the darkness lasts. So be still, like the watchman who waits for the morning.

There is also a way out for Y through Jesus Christ, even though for the time being he is being chastened. But such things take time. One can forgive a person in a moment, but one cannot rebuild fellowship in an instant. It’s the same with justification and sanctification. Justification can happen quickly; sanctification takes place over a period of time. It is good to be obedient, but one must take care to whom one is obedient. It’s written that we are to obey our guides in the Lord. Only in the Lord are we to obey them, and the condition is that they really have guided us in the Lord. It’s up to each one of us to test all things and to hold fast to what is good. Only what I can digest will give me nourishment and growth; as for everything else, I can let it be.

Listen carefully to what the Spirit is speaking in the church. Disregard everything that doesn’t agree with the Scriptures, irrespective of who or where it comes from. Look after the things God wants safeguarded, then everything will come into order.

God’s rich grace be upon you in the work, dear brother. Be bold and strong. Greet your wife and ask her to be quick to correct all your failings — but also to keep an eye on her own.

Loving greetings to you and the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 18, 1924 — # 247


Dear Brother X,

Thank you for your good letter which came today.

The thing that is causing unrest is this: Christ manifested in the flesh. Great is the mystery of godliness. This must be experienced; it can’t be grasped with the intellect. If it could, it wouldn’t be the mystery of godliness.

When you know in your own heart that you are being obedient to the Spirit of God and are letting His Spirit guide you, then as far as you are concerned, everything is in order. The issue is not when or how you received the Spirit. The important thing is that you are in possession of the Spirit.

Concerning the laying on of hands: This can be a help to bring brothers to faith and to get hold of the things they are seeking. But the laying on of hands serves a number of different purposes. Laying hands on a new Christian is not the same as laying hands on the elders. The church laid hands on Paul and Barnabas when they sent them out. Laying on of hands can serve as a special blessing or as a demonstration of acceptance or approval of the ministry a person already has in order to strengthen him to continue the work. It can also help when someone is pressing through to receive the baptism of the Holy Spirit. It’s a question of what each person is seeking and what his individual needs are. This is how I personally understand the laying on of hands. Since there is a whole doctrine concerning this, we should be able to say a little about it. There’s also a laying on of hands for the healing of the sick.

If people want to go and listen to Y, don’t let that bother you; just let them go. Give them complete liberty. We’re not trying to form a denomination or an organization. Just hold fast to what you have so no one takes your crown. Carry out your ministry as unto God. When they have grown tired of going here and there, they’ll know where they can find a place of rest. Even the dove Noah sent out understood that.

I am in total agreement with you — with what you explained in your letter. Not everyone receives the baptism of the Spirit in the same way. If you hadn’t received God’s Spirit, we would no doubt have sensed some animosity in one way or another. But you have what you believe you have, when that faith is the faith of Jesus Christ, God’s Son.

There is only one faith, one baptism, one God. Therefore, be strong and very courageous. Use the laying on of hands as a help in this direction.

He was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin. Now we can ask ourselves: How are we tempted? In what way must we suffer in order to be found like Him — without sin? He suffered, being tempted. He took upon Himself flesh and blood, because the children had partaken of it. According to the flesh, He was of the seed of David. Therefore He had to suffer death according to the flesh, but was made alive according to the Spirit. He voluntarily took upon Himself flesh and blood, and He did that in order to free us from the fall. Adam had no need of a Savior before the fall. These theories about Jesus having a nature like Adam before the fall are idle presumptions which have no support whatsoever in the Word of God.

Loving greetings to you and all the others.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 7, 1925 — # 248


Dear Brother X, Peace!

Thank you for your good letter I received today. I see you’ve found a stable that can be converted into a meeting hall. That seems quite sensible. We should prefer things that are lowly, for it is there that God’s will is to be found. To ask for God’s approval of how things should be, where the building should be located, etc., while one’s heart is full of one’s own thoughts, opinions, and decisions, just shows that one is on quite the wrong track. We need to come before Him as unknowing and helpless people, full of a desire for the things we pray for and God’s help — thankful for everything just the way He chooses to do it. Then God can reveal His will and give the necessary help. We then understand that it really is God who has bestowed the gift, and it becomes meaningful to give Him the glory for it. It is true as it is written: “For without Me you can do nothing.”

I have thought of visiting you in Oslo many times, but one often has to be satisfied with just the thought. When the day comes that we can get our bodies to be where our thoughts are, we will be more mobile. We are well, and things are getting better the more we enter into rest — rest from all anxiety over hard times, opposition, and everything else that is necessary for our education, because our faith is the victory. If there were no difficulties, the word “victory” could be abolished.

If brother Aslaksen could get everyone from Tjøme to come to the conference, I believe that he really would have pulled off something worthwhile. Even though there are many pilots out there, they still can’t find the way to righteousness and truth, for they themselves need a pilot.

Greet all the brothers and sisters. Your searching brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 30, 1926 — # 249


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your letter and for the subscriptions. Those who can’t afford to pay for the paper can get it free of charge this year. As far as next year is concerned, we can talk about that later.

Thank you for the invitation to come to Brevik. It looks as if it won’t work out for me this time. It seems to me that you should work with what you have, and that each one ought to exercise himself in faith and in drawing near to God in prayer. When you are together, pray much, for only God can keep all these new converts on the inner ways. I was so happy to hear about each one. I hope to be able to see them at the conference. Opposition within the home must be overcome. It’s not possible to be a disciple of Jesus and at the same time be a slave of man.

Each one must guard against getting puffed up by the knowledge he has received. For this reason everyone should be exhorted to pray often and to steer clear of unnecessary discussions. You should break bread when you are alone together and do everything possible to strengthen fellowship. In this way you will all be strengthened and grow.

Greet your family and each one of the dear brothers and sisters with Ezekiel 28:25. My loving greetings to you.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, November 20, 1926 — # 250


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

We had another really blessed conference, but we missed you, dear brother. However, I know you would have come, had it been possible. One can sense at every conference that confidence, brotherhood, and unity in the Spirit are growing stronger as the years go by. I believe that the brothers whom God has placed in their respective towns are truly servants of God. Throughout the years they have been tried and purged, and they have remained steadfast. I’m so very thankful to God for this. Your faithfulness in the ministry for the furtherance of the kingdom of God is manifest, and by God’s grace I will encourage you to continued faithfulness in that small area God has given you to watch over. The righteous Judge will say to you on that day: “Well done, good and faithful servant; you were faithful over a few things, I will make you ruler over many things.” God’s reward and God’s honor can stand the test.

Greet sister Y with these words of Jesus: “No one, having put his hand to the plow, and looking back, is fit for the kingdom of God.” Tell her that it is much more glorious in the sanctuary than in the outer court. There are more people in the outer court, because it’s closer to the world. The High Priest only went into the Most Holy Place once a year. There he came into the presence of God, and that was worth more to him than the presence of an entire people. David says: “By my God I can leap over a wall.” Perhaps sister Y also ought to try leaping the walls that are in her way??? It will succeed for her when she reckons with God.

Brother Aslaksen said he would visit Sandefjord and Brevik before Christmas. He’s been in Fredrikstad, Drøbak, and Oslo and will visit you soon. The brothers and sisters in Fredrikstad are fighting on bravely. There were fifteen present at brother Aslaksen’s meetings, and that’s a sizeable assembly for someone who labors with souls one by one.

Let us have a care for the individual. If we can’t manage this, it will be impossible to take care of two, let alone a whole assembly.

Greet the brothers and sisters in Brevik with Isaiah 55, from verse 8 to the end of the chapter. Loving greetings to you with 2 Timothy 2:15. Greet those in your home.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 13, 1927 — # 251


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter received today, which is the first one you have written to me. I’m really glad that things are going well in Drøbak and that love reigns. It is said that when John was old and he had to be carried to the churches, he would say: “My children, love one another!” He couldn’t have put it more succinctly! Love covers a multitude of sins. I’m writing to you about this, dear brother, because I believe that your greatest strength will lie in “love.” Love is a sustaining, developing power which leads us on. Lay hold of this, and it will be yours forever; when faith and hope are gone, love will remain. Love builds up, while its opposite, “unlove,” breaks down.

God has given you an upright heart and a good standing in His church. Therefore, be thankful — and in the fear of the Lord return with interest what you have received from Him, for everything that is ours is His, just as everything that is His is ours in love, which is God Himself. Our personal development, and all the fruit we bring forth by the Spirit, will redound to the Father’s joy and honor. But since “love” is the Father Himself, and does not seek its own, it benefits us — not in ourselves and for ourselves, but in Him. Everything good comes from above, from the Father of lights; but all evil comes from below, through the carnal senses. Therefore, choose what is from above and mortify what is from below, then you will have spiritual weight. You will never be found wanting, since it is what comes from above that has weight.

Greet your wife and the brothers and sisters. Warm greetings also to you from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 15, 1927 — # 252


Dear Brother X,

You ask what is meant by “the light of the Spirit in our inner man” and “the morning star” (2 Peter 1:19). These two expressions amount to the same thing. We have the prophetic word made more sure, which you do well to heed as to a light that shines in a dark place, until the day dawns and the morning star rises in your heart. In other words, we do well to heed God’s light, even if it is small and distant. By doing this, we will soon experience the light of day shining forth; then, last of all, Christ — the Morning Star — will remain in our hearts after all the other stars have disappeared because of the daylight. Revelation 22:16. The stars can be compared to the commandments of God, but the Morning Star embraces all the commandments in Himself, since the requirement of the law was fulfilled in Him. We can compare the daylight to the Father. Daylight and the Morning Star meet one another. That is to say, the Son will finally be subject to the Father. The morning star becomes invisible in the daylight; nonetheless it is still there. He who offends in one commandment is guilty of all. The opposite of this is that he who heeds one commandment and observes it carefully will soon keep many other commandments carefully until the law becomes his tutor to bring him to Christ. At that point all the other commandments are embraced in the one person, “the Morning Star.” Light, which was previously on the outside, now enters the heart. Only those who “do the will of God” receive light. He who knows the will of God, yet doesn’t do it, will remain in darkness. Liberation in Christ is on its way to you. Seek and you will find. I’m glad because I can tell that you are an inquiring soul who takes heed to the prophetic word. Continue to do so until the day dawns and you see the Morning Star. Read the letter to the Galatians and Romans 6 and 7.

Loving greetings from your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, September 22, 1927 — # 253


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your letter of the 18th of this month.

We do not preach a man as the head, but Christ, who was conceived by the Holy Spirit and born of the virgin Mary, suffered under Pontius Pilate, died, and was buried. He was resurrected from the dead and is seated at the right hand of the Father, from whence He shall return to judge both the living and the dead. We have no other Jesus, nor do we have any other head.

For five years I have had more of a battle for those brothers than you can imagine. I have defended them more than anyone else has. Twice the brothers and sisters in X have bid me farewell for good, but I still haven’t given up hope for them. They have regarded me as misguided, weak, and vacillating because I haven’t, like the Pope in Rome, forced my way through and silenced other opinions by force and violence. Notice how God’s Spirit works patiently to convince people. A spiritual person should never proceed in any other way.

The problem is not with the brothers and sisters in X. It all centers around just one person: brother Y, who is holding on to his position as a leader because he wants to have the esteem and honor that comes with it. We shouldn’t want to be called “teacher” or “leader.” This is the “sore point,” the cause of all the unrest. Lay down all weapons, and peace will follow automatically. Personally, I’ve never demanded that other people should esteem me as a leader. I have willingly put myself in the lowest place in every way, not just in the lowest chair; but I have also sought by God’s grace to submit myself so that God in His time would be able to show what was right. Jesus humbled Himself. That is the way that leads to the Head. Let us meet one another in a conciliatory attitude of mind.

You should feel free to do what your conscience dictates. I’m not seeking followers. If I were, I wouldn’t be a servant of Christ. Give this matter a little time, and it will become manifest where the problem lies. Wait upon the Lord. Jesus called Judas His friend, and He behaved in such a way that His disciples didn’t know who was going to betray Him. He didn’t berate him in the presence of all the others. He committed everything to the Father. If we also commit everything to Him, it will go well. The point is not that we should submit to the brothers and sisters in eastern Norway, as you mentioned, but that we should submit to God. Then we get fellowship with the brothers and sisters in eastern Norway as well.

Let this letter be read wherever it can be of help. We don’t want to do anything in secret.

Loving greetings to you and the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 6, 1927 — # 254


Dear Brother X, Peace!

Thank you for your letter.

Brother Aslaksen is here. He is holding meetings every evening, and I believe that nearly all the young people who go to the meetings have now been saved, while several others have been blessed. All these young people had heard a great deal, but now they’ve made a commitment. Praise God throughout eternity for all this salvation.

God saves our children, as the Scriptures say: “For the promise is to you and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God will call.” It is easy for these young people to understand things, but often older people don’t understand anything.

I rejoice that the work has succeeded for you. Take everything naturally, just as it comes, and things will go well. God will lead the upright to His servants.

At the meeting we spoke about how Jesus, in His flesh, abolished the law with its rules and commandments. Ephesians 2:15. He suffered death in the flesh, and He offered Himself in the power of an eternal Spirit. The law was given because of transgressions — manifestations of the flesh. But when the flesh died, He abolished the law as law. I think most people understood this.

I think what was said about dressing appropriately had a good effect. I only hope they don’t go in the opposite direction now and dress up too much. It’s difficult to stay in the middle of the road.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Everyone here sends greetings.

Loving greetings from brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 7, 1927 — # 255


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter received today. Brother Aslaksen is here, and there is revival among the young people. He arrived on our silver wedding anniversary, October 27, and has been here since. Many people who don’t normally come to the meetings have also received something to think about.

It is callous and ungodly to harden oneself against the brothers. He who hates his brother is a murderer, and we know that no murderer has eternal life dwelling in him. You, for your part, must show much love toward them. This is Christian and manly. To harden oneself against the brothers because another person says to, shows that one is neither spiritual nor independent. It also shows that one doesn’t dare to draw one’s own conclusions. One isn’t really trying to get to the bottom of things, either.

The conference was excellent. God grants progress in every way; praised be His name! We are all doing well here and are being truly blessed. The hall is now being put to good use. We keep things going until around midnight every night, so I’m very tired now. Greet your wife.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 17, 1928 — # 256


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter which came today. Brother O., whom you mentioned in your letter, was here yesterday afternoon and traveled on today. Yes, he is a zealous, straightforward man. But now comes the test!!!

If a person can remain in rest when difficulties arise and not avail himself of human help, but rather allow God to rule, then he has victory. Blessed is the man who rests from his own works.

Abraham was promised a son, but he didn’t rest in that. He took Hagar, and she brought forth Ishmael, who has been a constant source of trouble for Israel down through the centuries. I’ve learned from experience that all unrest and anxiety can only produce an Ishmael, a child of the wilderness, Isaac’s adversary. In such an atmosphere it is impossible to bring forth spiritual children.

Therefore, dear brother, be at rest in all things and from all things, and you will receive an “Isaac” and all things together with him.

We’re all doing as well as we can here, brothers and sisters alike. I hope to see many of you at the conference.

Greet the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings to you from your brother pressing on with anticipation toward the land of rest,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 9, 1928 — # 257


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter of June 7 received today. I hear that you are in a battle at work. From what I gather, it is your income tax return that’s causing the problems. You disclosed some earnings which the others have failed to declare, isn’t that the case???

It looks like you have proceeded wisely in this matter, concentrating on what concerns you and as far as possible left the others alone. If this is the case, you can have a good conscience, and their attacks will just glance off your shield of faith. Besides, a servant in the church must be prepared for all sorts of sufferings. We have to go through difficulties if they are to have a beneficial effect on us and enable us to help others. You are the salt of the earth. Salt affects the things around it.

You have also experienced that the flesh of one’s relatives is no better than any other flesh. We can never expect any help from Egypt.

Besides, it must be said that all flesh has corrupted its way. True help is found only in the promptings and guidance of the Spirit and in God’s Word. Everything else is just “hit and miss” — a work of man. That’s why it’s so important to wait upon the Lord in everything. This is both right and profitable, because His judgments in every matter are true and irrefutable, and this brings true rest and peace as well as a good conscience. And who is sufficient for these things???

The fire will test each one’s work, of what sort it is. Blessed is he who endures. A complete surrender into the hands of God, letting Him guide us in our trials, can liberate and save us. Even if you feel like you’re hanging somewhere between heaven and earth, abide quietly on the cross with Jesus. “Why are you cast down, O my soul? And why are you disquieted within me?” “Surely I have calmed and quieted my soul, like a weaned child with his mother.” As a servant of Christ you must learn to remain calm in the midst of the storm. Otherwise you’ll be tossed about by the waves, thrown up on the shore, and suffer total shipwreck. Therefore, it’s important to stand firm and unshakable and wait upon the Lord. Don’t do anything according to your own inclinations. In this way the kingdom of God will grow within you and around you. Greet the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings from brother

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 7, 1928 — # 258


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter.

I’m in complete agreement with what you write. Sin in the flesh, when allowed to influence the mind, is the thing that causes division.

You will be happy to hear, dear brother, that there has been revival here among the children and the young people. Boys between eight and eighteen years of age pray aloud one after the other with their frail, high-pitched voices. Several boys who came here from other towns have also been saved. Both boys and girls have their own meetings; then they have a joint youth meeting every Saturday evening. But at our adult meetings all the young people join in as well, so that all the meetings end up being youth meetings.

In Oslo the brothers and sisters have rented the second floor of Brogaten 24. There has been a “full house” at brother Aslaksen’s meetings. I enclose a letter and a card from brother Aslaksen, who has a very optimistic view of the situation.

The number of officers in the Navy is being reduced, and I have applied for a discharge on a reduced salary, effective October 15. I wrote to brother Aslaksen that I would never become a preacher, which is why he wrote “Preacher J. O. Smith” on the card. So just take that as a joke.

Please greet those in your home and all the dear brothers and sisters who are willing to receive such a greeting.

God has blessed brother Aslaksen with a special ability to speak God’s Word so that everyone must close his mouth and listen.

Hearty greetings from your brother united both in battle and in peace,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 25, 1932 — # 259


Dear Brother in the Lord, X,

Thank you very much for your letter which I received today.

We don’t have anything against other believers, but it is worth noticing that most of them don’t want to hear about the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings. If the power of the Spirit is to be of any profit to us, it must be utilized to bring us into fellowship with Christ in His sufferings and in His death. Philippians 3:10. There is an outer court (the forgiveness of sins), there is a Holy Place (the baptism of the Spirit), and there is a Holy of Holies (being conformed to the image of Christ in His death). For there are three that bear witness: the Spirit, the water, and the blood. Jesus not only came by water, but by water and blood. In the power of the Spirit we are to resist sin to the point of shedding blood. Then that power has not been in vain. The waterfall at Sarpsborg plunged over the cliff for centuries to virtually no profit. Eventually people learned how to harness its power for light and other useful purposes. It’s the same with the power of the Spirit: it must be utilized to accomplish a work if it’s not to be in vain. What so many believers resist is the utilization of this power for obedience to the faith. That’s also why leaders lack light over “Christ manifested in the flesh” — indeed, they even oppose a deeper development in God. We’re not attacking them; we’re attacking that attitude of mind which hates the cross, because we know by experience that such an attitude leads to false liberty.

It is right to seek 1) the forgiveness of sins, 2) the power of the Spirit, which is given to all those who obey Him, and 3) the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings, which every soul who is obedient to the Spirit must obviously enter into. There’s nothing to strive about as long as everybody is willing to follow Jesus in His footsteps. But this is up to the individual; you can’t get people to come to a godly life in droves.

Loving greetings from your brother, bound in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 31, 1933 — # 260


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your letter of the 30th of this month. I can see you are a soul who is seeking the truth.

To answer your question correctly, I have to say: We have no name. “Smith’s Friends” is a name that outsiders have given us. We are just a free group of people without a name and without any human organization.

To help you understand this, I ought to tell you a bit about how it all started. And since this work began with me, permit me to say a bit about how, through the grace of God, it all came about.

I was strongly drawn by God’s Spirit right from my childhood. My father was a righteous man. (He died as a munitions manager in Kristiansand in 1915.) He planted a good seed in us during our childhood. When I was fifteen-and-a-half years old, I went to sea; two years later I joined the Navy, where I remained for nearly 40 years, serving at different levels up to the rank of Chief Gunnery Officer. After six years as a seaman in the Navy, I came back to my home town. All my friends had disappeared. Things were very quiet. God’s Spirit began to speak powerfully in my inner man, and I couldn’t resist Him. On May 17, 1898, at night during middle-watch on board the monitor Thor, I gave my life to God and received a deep assurance in my inner man that I belonged to Him. I was attending a Methodist church at that time, but wasn’t getting enough nourishment. I began some small meetings with a few young people. We prayed and read the Bible. God’s Spirit worked powerfully in me, urging me to cleanse myself. Things didn’t go so quickly, but I took everything as being from God, and He gave me strength. Two years after my conversion, in the year 1900, on board the gunboat Sleipner, God’s Spirit came upon me. After that, the Scriptures became much easier to understand than before. But the strange thing was that none of the believers I knew, understood me. I became lonely. But then I met different people here and there on ships and in the naval yard. We would come together in the evenings and pray and read the Scriptures. In 1905 my brother, the dentist Aksel Smith, was saved. We met together in 1907 in Horten. We prayed and examined the Scriptures. In 1908 I met Cadet Elias Aslaksen on board Sleipner. We prayed and read the Bible. My brother Aksel was the first one who asked me to baptize him. That same day he resigned from the state church. Then we came together and broke bread. During the war, I was in Finn-mark and on the west coast. While on shore leave we held meetings wherever there was an open door. God blessed the work more than we could imagine, and today there are a great many brothers and sisters in different places.

I hope, dear brother, that this brief account gives you a glimpse into our work. Our great concern has always been to live a god-fearing life. It has never been our intention to create a denomination. God’s blessing has made us what we are today.

We are not registered anywhere, nor do we enroll others. We are registered in the Lamb’s Book of Life. Our fellowship is in the Spirit. It is the result of walking in the light that God gives. Not everyone among us is equally godfearing, but we try to make good people out of everyone God sends our way.

I would really like to have a deeper conversation with you about “God’s way.”

As for the Pentecostals, you mustn’t think that we have anything against them. But we have tried to help them understand that it’s not just a matter of receiving the Spirit, but also of being obedient to the Spirit. I don’t doubt that there are godfearing people among the Pentecostals.

I have no forms for resigning from the state church. Suffice it to say that I have no intention of enrolling myself in any human organization. For we know that all party spirit is of the devil. It is a work of the flesh. It excludes other children of God who want to live according to the Scriptures and don’t want to be in the denominations. Galatians 5:19–26.

Loving greetings from your brother, bound in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 10, 1933 — # 261


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your good letter which I received today. You ask:

1. “Was it Jesus’ crushed self-will that made Him the light of the world?”

In John 5:30 it is clearly written that Jesus did not seek His own will, but the will of the Father who sent Him. And in John 6:38 it is written: “For I have come down from heaven, not to do My own will, but the will of Him who sent Me.” Jesus’ will according to the flesh had to be crushed in order for Him to do God’s will. This process made Him the light of the world. He brought forth crushed olives so that the light could shine.

“If anyone wills to do His will, he shall know concerning the doctrine, whether it is from God or whether I speak on My own authority.” John 7:17.

God’s Spirit hovered over the waters even before we were created, so we ought to stop asking questions about God’s origin. He dwells in an unapproachable light, and is the Father from whom the whole family in heaven and earth is named. Otherwise who was He crushing olives for??

2. and 3. “The baptism of the Spirit seems to be overlooked among you. Do the members of your group usually experience this, or do you deny any knowledge of it?”

We do not overlook the baptism of the Spirit, nor do we deny knowledge of it. On the contrary, our main emphasis is on being in possession of the Spirit and obeying Him. All this profane chatter about the Spirit without having the Spirit or walking in the Spirit is repulsive to both God and man. It is the Spirit who leads us into the sufferings of Christ, to light, and to the knowledge of God.

4. “Shouldn’t the children of God organize themselves into churches?”

“For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body — whether Jews or Greeks, whether slaves or free — and have all been made to drink into one Spirit.” 1 Corinthians 12:13. The body is the church. Think about the word “body.” It is the Spirit who baptizes into one body. This body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. The Spirit doesn’t baptize into “Smith’s” church or into the Pentecostal church, but into the church of God.

But now I would like you to answer the following questions:

1. You claim that you have not received God’s Spirit. How will you then be able to comprehend the unity in the body into which the Spirit baptizes? The natural man does not receive the things of the Spirit of God.

2. How could Jesus love the 70, but above these the twelve, and among the twelve the three, and of the three the one?

3. In whose flesh was sin condemned? Romans 8:3.

4. Philippians 2:6–7. What does it mean that Jesus “didn’t consider it robbery to be equal with God,” but “made Himself of no reputation”? And why did He do this?

Please answer openly and honestly.

Loving greetings from brother

J. O. Smith





Horten, June 16, 1933 — # 262


Dear Brother X,

Grace and peace!

Many thanks for your letter, received today. You write in the letter: “My three questions concerning oil for illumination, the baptism of the Spirit, and an organized local church are still unanswered.”

Exodus 27:20–21: The high priest required crushed olives from the children of Israel for the lamps so that the lamps would always be prepared. This, of course, corresponds to a crushed self-will. He who wants his lamp to shine has to obtain this light by having his self-will crushed. Jesus came in order to establish the second — that is, God’s will. Hebrews 10, from verse 5. God’s will is our sanctification.

The baptism of the Spirit: An enormous amount could be written about this. “And we are His witnesses to these things, and so also is the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey Him.” Acts 5:32. The Spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak. The Spirit fills everyone who obeys Him. We must pray for the Holy Spirit. God gives the Spirit more willingly than parents give bread to their children. John 14, from verse 14. God is not miserly, but people are full of unbelief, and this prevents them from receiving the baptism of the Spirit. We receive the Spirit by faith. I’ve personally prayed with many people who received the baptism of the Holy Spirit instantaneously and spoke in tongues. But I myself received the baptism of the Spirit by obeying the Spirit. It wasn’t until later that I received the gift of tongues and the gift of interpretation. Of course I believe in that “pre-Pentecost” Spirit, if one wants to call it that. But this must lead us to Pentecost. Then we receive power to meet our Easter. It’s here that so many err; they just want to rejoice in the power of Pentecost without meeting their own personal Easter.

Make the sacrifice, and the Spirit will come of its own accord. Come to Moriah with your Isaac. “If we died with Christ then we shall also live with Him.”

Local churches: All churches must be established according to the leading and workings of the Spirit. If they are, then the church in Corinth won’t clash with the church in Ephesus, nor the church in Horten with the church in Oslo. Of course I believe in local churches, in apostles, prophets, teachers, and shepherds. But I don’t believe in theatrically staged churches put together by men according to a “biblical pattern.” I know of churches with so-called elders, prophets, and apostles who are anything but pure in such matters as adultery and the love of money. May God save us from such wretchedness. It is local churches such as these that hate the cross and the word of the cross.

It’s not easy for a young brother such as Y, who has only been converted for a couple of years, to answer every question fully and in depth. My opinion is that he is one of the few who, in the space of a short time, has received great light. He must have been good at crushing olives. There’s no doubt about that.

No, dear brother, I’m not being evasive in my answers, but I believe that you are being evasive with your Isaac. If this were not the case, you would have received the baptism of the Spirit a long time ago. You say: “When you use the expression ‘baptism of the Spirit’ it almost sounds as if you are limiting it to receiving the Spirit when you are born again.”

When a person is born again, he really ought to be so faithful that he is totally dead to everything of the old life. But that’s not how it is in practice. The Spirit that he has and obeys is therefore on a level with the baptism of John, who baptized sons of vipers and others to the forgiveness of sins. But John always pointed to the One (Jesus) who was to come after him.

Those who have received the Spirit don’t keep on seeking. It’s like a hungry man who eats until he is satisfied; then he stops asking for more food. If a man applies for a job and gets it, he stops applying for the job. Instead, he goes on to develop his skills in that position.

My dear brother X. Your unbelief hinders you. Live in the Spirit, believe in the Spirit, pray in the Spirit, battle against the flesh in the Spirit, and in every way be obedient to the Spirit. Then you have the Spirit. This isn’t evasion; it is direct action against the flesh and all carnality. This is simple and easy to understand.

I can’t give a guarantee for all the brothers and sisters who attend our meetings, but I know that if one follows the teachings preached by the elders, one will be happy here and in eternity.

The waterfalls have been roaring down the mountainsides for hundreds of years, but now they are redirected through huge turbines and accomplish a great deal of work.

It’s the same with the baptism of the Spirit. The Spirit is to guide us into all truth. His purpose is to accomplish a work, not just to plunge over the edge of a mountain. In this area there is a great need for enlightenment.

Loving greetings. I understand we are getting nearer and nearer to the heart of the matter, which in all likelihood will end in a climax of surrender into the death of Christ, and from there into an unending blessing in the Holy Spirit. Philippians 3:10.

Your brother battling before, during, and after Pentecost and with his course set for Easter,

J. O. Smith





Horten, August 22, 1933 — # 263


Dear Brother X, Peace!

We have no “preaching brothers” in Oslo. Neither do we have any in the vicinity of K. We are not interested in making our brothers preachers, but we are diligent to make them disciples, just as Jesus commands. “Follow Me,” Jesus says, “and I will make you fishers of men.” The effects of the work of a fisher of men are unending, but little or nothing comes from the work of most preachers. Fishers of men concentrate on those who are poor in spirit, and they rejoice over one soul, whereas preachers are out looking for the multitudes.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 24, 1933 — # 264


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

It was with great joy that I read your letter. It testified of a greater understanding and light than ever before. However, there is one thing I noticed, and that’s why I’m writing. You write something like this: “My wife tells me that the other brothers and sisters up here think I am a bit hard and unloving. Perhaps I am too zealous and unloving, etc.”

Now the point is that what the brothers and sisters up there call love is perhaps not love at all. What people commonly call “love” is often a love of the flesh. God’s love wars against such carnal love, because the Spirit and the flesh are contrary to one another. From now on, two shall be against three and three against two in the same house, because Jesus did not come with peace for the flesh, but with war. It’s good to be zealous, because this consumes one’s self-life. “Zeal for Your house has eaten Me up.”

What I am saying, then, is that God’s promptings in your heart are absolutely correct, though you believe them to be wrong. Believe in God’s testimony more than man’s testimony, and it will go exactly as it should.

It really was a joy to read your letter. May God bless you with continued progress.

I’ve thought of traveling to Denmark after the conference, Lord willing. Many people are receiving light down there.

Loving greetings from your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 4, 1934 — # 265


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for our time together during the conference. It really surprises me how much support there is from all directions. God is blessing in every way. The preaching among us becomes deeper and more sincere. Praised be His name.

We are to be equipped for the work of the ministry. This includes the whole issue of brothers who don’t have the ministry of the Word being too eager to speak. This was mentioned twice while I was in Y, but it doesn’t look like it has been understood by those concerned. A couple of brothers in particular speak far too long. Z pops up and preaches out of season. During a testimony meeting everyone can speak or testify, but even then one mustn’t torment people. Everything should be done unto edification. If you could get these two brothers to stay in the background more, the church would suffer less and everything would be more edifying and full of wisdom. I take it that you noticed this long ago. The more that wisdom is applied, the greater the progress. Try by God’s grace to get rid of everything that tears down. Don’t be afraid of intervening. The best approach would be to talk to them about it privately; but if they don’t put this right, they must be addressed publicly.

When, during the course of a message, the Spirit’s anointing begins to wane or cease altogether yet the speaker goes on speaking, all that’s left is flesh. The sword is to be used on such flesh. Constant repetitions and self-satisfied religious babbling leads only to corruption.

Just these lines to further the cause.

Loving greetings from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, February 8, 1934 — # 266


Dear Brother X,

Hearty thanks for your letter dated February 6. It gives me much joy to see you looking at life more confidently than ever before, and I was glad to hear you had a good New Year’s conference.

Of His own will He has brought us forth by the word of truth, that we might be a kind of firstfruits of His creatures. James 1:18. From this we can see that the truth gives birth to the firstfruits. It liberates and delivers. Jesus is the truth; therefore His bride must be of the truth. The Spirit of Christ is the spirit of truth. Let us therefore receive the truth so we can be saved; for all those who do not receive the love of the truth will perish, because they take pleasure in unrighteousness. 2 Thessalonians 2:10–12.

Let us therefore be careful what we believe and what we receive. God’s Word has an effect in each and every person who believes in Jesus Christ; a life is being formed within. Any other faith is just like air and wind. It brings nothing to birth.

Hearty thanks for the invitation to come and hold some Bible studies. I have no other desire than to labor in the ministry of the Word and the Spirit, and I believe especially in the value of conversing with people in smaller groups and one-to-one. But as to when and where, I’m not in a position right now to be able to decide. At the moment, brother Sigurd Bratlie is here. After the New Year’s conference, he was in Hønefoss and in Hen, where there was revival.

February 12:

We’ve just had a prayer meeting and prayed for the gifts of the Spirit. We plan to continue with this. It was very blessed. Among other things, we prayed for the gift of healing and the gift of tongues. We have meetings every evening, and all the meetings point inwards toward greater light and revelation from God.

I’ll write and ask you if it’s convenient for me to come when things are ready at this end. I can’t say right now whether I’ll be able to stay with you as long as a week. The Spirit will make that clear once we are together.

In any case, I look forward to praying and having Bible studies with you. Pray beforehand for these meetings, so that hearts will be open and receptive.

There is a conference in Sandefjord this coming Sunday. I hope that many people come from Tønsberg, Brevik, and Porsgrunn. The other day, five people were converted in one evening among the brothers and sisters in Brevik — two married couples and one man. There is revival in and around Brevik.

Loving greetings to you and your family, as well as the brothers and sisters, from brother

J. O. Smith





Horten, March 4, 1934 — # 267


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Many thanks for your good letter. We’ve just had the most amazing conference I’ve ever experienced. As you know, we had been praying for about a month and a half before the conference. Many in Horten were baptized with the Holy Spirit and spoke in tongues. Then we had the brothers’ conference on Maundy Thursday and Good Friday. People prayed like I’ve never heard before. Their cries were full of need. One after the other, they were filled with the Holy Spirit. We didn’t have time to do anything else but pray. The spirit of prayer gripped everyone.

On Easter Sunday and Monday the sisters came to the conference. There was a continuous wave of prayer until well after midnight. I estimate that about 100 brothers and sisters received the gift of tongues, in addition to all those who were filled with the Holy Spirit. Several people who had been ill were healed. The brothers and sisters also prayed in the homes and hotels where they were staying. Neither in 1907 nor since have I seen anything to compare with this.

It really helps to pray and not grow weary. Everyone went home from the conference with great treasures, and I’m certain that this spirit of prayer will spread to many towns.

When you read this letter to the brothers and sisters, greet them all warmly from brother Sigurd Bratlie and myself. We remember the good days we had together with you all. Greet your wife and children.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 24, 1934 — # 268


Dear Brother X, God’s perfect peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter, along with the seven new subscriptions.

What you write about being dry and not empty enough in yourself, etc., is the way to poorness of spirit. This is the foundation work for the building. Don’t be afraid of it. God prepares, He pours out, He gives us grace and faith, and He makes us humble of heart. Just follow His promptings, and everything will lead you to the goal. Wait on the Lord with watchfulness and prayer, and help will come (the latter and the former rain) when you least expect it. God is not unrighteous; He will not disappoint those who cry to Him day and night; He will avenge them speedily. Everyone who prays will receive, and for those who knock, it will be opened. Keep going; never give up until you are filled with the Holy Spirit and with faith.

Remember that everything God does is a “way.” There is a way to becoming humble and poor in spirit. It is not our own works, but God’s work. We must believe this, then joy and peace will come. Poorness of spirit forms the river bed in which the living water can flow. You say, “Rejoice in the Lord! Can I create this joy myself?” Yes, you believe in poverty of spirit, and so at the same time you believe the Scripture: “Blessed are the poor in spirit.” With that comes joy, for the kingdom of heaven belongs to such people. Hallelujah! This is joy in the midst of sorrow. Dear brother, it’s going well just the way it is. It’s a thousand times worse for those who are rich and wealthy and have need of nothing, yet are poor, blind, and naked and don’t know it. Revelation 3:14–22.

We continue to have prayer meetings. We’re praying for the gift of healing and for revival. God is doing great things in many places.

Greet the brothers and sisters and those in your home, and loving greetings to you with John 15:3–8.

Your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, July 3, 1934 — # 269


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter. I see you are renewing your invitation to my wife and me. Yes, I remember your wife’s invitation while we sat at the table, and how you agreed with it. But we are not the sort of people who presume upon the goodness of our fellow man. Our work consists of helping people according to the goodness and wisdom that God gives. And I would also really like to help you, dear brother.

Concerning your spiritual life, seek God personally. Don’t turn to the multitudes, because usually they can’t even help themselves, much less others. There was only one among a thousand who could help in the day of need, Elihu says. Job 33:23.

It is by the law of faith that we are justified before God. But faith has nothing to do with the law. Galatians 3:5. If there were any law that could give life, then true righteousness would be attainable by the law. But now God has confined everything under sin so that those who believe might obtain the promise by faith. Galatians 3:21–22. In other words, you have to believe.

The minute you believe, the promises are yours. We receive the Spirit through faith, not through the works of the law. I really believe that you’ve been defiled by the unbelief of the Galatians and their works of the law. God will liberate you from this the moment you commit yourself to the law of the Spirit, which gives life. This quickens our human spirit, because the second Adam has become a life-giving spirit. We are made alive by the second Adam. It’s only through this law that we can attain to righteousness.

My wife and I thank you both heartily for your genuine love and for the invitation which we are unfortunately unable to accept at present.

Loving greetings to you both.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, September 19, 1934 — # 270


Dear Brother X,

God’s perfect peace!

Brother Sigurd Bratlie and I have been in Telemark, Brevik, Porsgrunn, and Skien. Tomorrow I’ll be traveling via Brevik to Kristiansand. God’s blessing has been everywhere. In the towns I mentioned, more and more people are getting light. In Skien we advertised the theme: “Why the Pentecostal Revival Has Stagnated.” The meeting hall was packed; people were even sitting on the platform and standing in the hallways. Apparently the majority were Pentecostals. We explained that the revival had stagnated within the ranks of the Pentecostals themselves, because they did not enter into the fellowship of Christ’s sufferings in order to get the third witness — the witness of the blood. There was opportunity for everyone to testify, and no one said a single word in opposition. They left admitting it was true. It’s no use fighting against the truth. Let’s hope all this will have a good effect.

Many people are enemies of the cross of Christ. They are not enemies of the “forgiveness of sins,” nor of “the baptism of the Spirit,” nor of “the gifts of the Spirit,” nor of “Christ bearing His cross”; but they are enemies of “taking up the cross” themselves and following Him. Therefore people “mark time” year after year without moving from the spot. God’s Word is to be practiced and taught. Acts 1:1–2. Only then will the Word become flesh.

God’s Spirit is an instructor in righteousness. When Jesus gave His promise that the Spirit would come, this was an announcement, not an instruction. We receive instruction from the Spirit by following Him and obeying Him. Most people have no teaching, but cling to the announcement.

Greet your wife, your children, and the brothers and sisters. Rejoice always; pray without ceasing. I’m very glad that you want to listen to the promptings of the Holy Spirit within you. In this way you’ll learn to discern clearly between good and evil. If you love the good and hate the evil, you will begin on the same way on which Jesus was anointed with the oil of gladness more than His companions. Joy comes by doing the Word of God. Never turn away from this, for this is the doctrine of Christ. This is the doctrine I have chosen as my own.

Loving greetings from your devoted brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Horten, September 27, 1934 — # 271


Dear Brother X,

I believe that first and foremost one ought to take care of the sheep and lambs inside the church so they feel that the church is their home. A church is needed in Y where those who are upright can come together in peace and quiet, in order to be built up together into a habitation of God in the Spirit. However, if one is too zealous in an outward direction, the inward is bound to suffer. When you have meetings — that is to say, church meetings — that are directed toward the inner life, the spirit of chastisement and anointing will help you keep the more superficial elements at a distance. At the same time, those who are upright will be satisfied and receive nourishment. These particularly ungodly elements must be dealt with by the circumstances of life so that they reap an abundance of corruption from what they sow. Perhaps then they’ll begin to think differently. If one or another of them comes upon better thoughts, he’ll separate himself from the worst of them. You say that you feel there is a distance between us now and then. That’s not how it seems to me. But the school of life has taught me to adjust my life and relationships so that I maintain the distance that God’s Spirit would have. No doubt you’ve had the same experience in your relationships with others. This doesn’t represent a break in our fellowship in the light, but it is part of having a proper attitude toward one another in the light of Christ. If this is lacking, all respect for one another disappears; but it’s precisely because of this that love and fellowship can thrive and increase. Everything is in development. To maintain this distance in our ministry is necessary, and only unfaithfulness can remove it. This is what it means to keep one’s proper domain, that domain which the angels forsook. This is something one never speaks about, but you have demanded an explanation of me. I believe you understand it very well, since you, too, have relationships with many people because of your ministry. This doesn’t separate us; rather, one person draws the other on in Christ, who draws all people to Himself. As it is written: “Now He who establishes us with you in Christ and has anointed us is God.” There are certainly many dwelling places in the one fellowship, the one Lord, and the one faith. It was here that Paul ran as if only one would win the prize. The distance lessens as the speed increases. And this only provokes one to run all the harder.

I know you understand this, and that’s why I’m writing. Would that you overtook me so that I could be painfully aware of the gap!

Loving greetings from your always devoted and interested servant in the ministry,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 26, 1934 — # 272


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your letter. There’s no shortage of letters of commendation, but there is a shortage of servants. The Corinthians were the apostle’s “letter,” but they were not his co-workers. On the other hand, Timothy was. Unfortunately, we don’t have many like him.

I’m really glad that you are coming to the conference. I’ve recently been in Oslo, Drøbak, and Tønsberg and held Bible studies. It was certainly very necessary, because much is hidden in that body which contains all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. If we were just as zealous to get hold of these inward treasures as we are to fish for souls outwardly, I believe we would achieve much greater results inwardly and be far more effective as fishers of men outwardly; because it is the wise man who wins souls. Doubtless, a revival can succeed at the hands of one person or another; but if that person doesn’t have wisdom, he won’t understand how to keep his catch. We’ve seen plenty of that.

I’m working hard to push the brothers into the kingdom of God ahead of me. You, too, dear brother; until recently you were worshiping wooden idols.

God is good; His mercy endures forever. He casts down all that is high and mighty and seats the poor with the princes of His people. Praised be His righteousness and love!

Greetings to you and your family from your brother in the same grace and with a nature like yours,

J. O. Smith





Horten, January 19, 1935 — # 273


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you very much for your letter.

Life goes on as usual here. The young people are holding meetings. The angel was to measure the temple of God, the altar, and those who worship there. But the outer court, outside the temple, was not to be measured, because that was to be trodden underfoot by the Gentiles. Revelation 11.

There are two kinds of Christians: 1) “temple” Christians, and 2) “outer court” Christians. The temple is the body, and these Christians can grow the growth of the body; but those who only live in the forgiveness of sins are “outer court” Christians. You cannot measure one single millimeter of growth in them. Nevertheless, they say they are rich and satisfied.

Therefore, disregard the warnings and the backbiting from the outer court, because the outer court is divided into 300–400 denominations. Jesus prayed that we might all be one. That is “temple Christianity” (the temple of His body). An upright soul really has to struggle to free himself from all denominations and come into the temple where all barriers are broken down. Thanks be to God for His glorious salvation! The world cannot believe because of all the discord and sectarianism among Christians. Yet there is only one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one voice (the voice of the Comforter), one body, and one God, the Father of all; for Christ is not divided. Party spirit is base sin. Nonetheless, those in the outer court fight for all they’re worth against “temple Christianity.” They believe they are doing God a service when they kill (spiritually speaking) everyone who wants to go out from them to Him — outside the camp.

I’ve written something about this for the March issue of Skjulte Skatter. Brother Aslaksen has been in Bergen and is now in Måløy.

A couple in Copenhagen has been converted. There is progress everywhere.

Loving greetings to you, your family, and the brothers and sisters from your devoted brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 7, 1935 — # 274


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter. I’m glad things are going well with you and in the towns nearby. Consistent faithfulness over a long period of time yields a good reward.

I have just come home from the meeting, where we spoke about “the harlot” who corrupts the earth. When God’s Spirit shines light on these things, people become quite fearful. How blessed it is to come out from her!

By God’s grace, things are going well here in Horten. Once again, Christmas is approaching. The years roll by, and our works “roll forth” from our lives. The day is coming when we will stand before our great Lord and Judge with all that we have done.

As I think of the brothers and sisters in different places (there are so many of them now), I can visualize them going in and out of the homes where I have visited them. It’s like that on the west coast and in Denmark, too.

Loving greetings to you and your family, as well as to the brothers and sisters. I wish you all a blessed Christmas.

Your brother in the Lord,

J. O. Smith





Brevik, February 21, 1936 — # 275


Dear Brother X,

Grace and peace!

It is blessed to receive grace and strength to visit the brothers and sisters. I feel surprisingly fit, despite these late evening meetings. I’ve just been in Fredrikstad, Sandefjord, Brevik, Porsgrunn, and Langesund. We plan to go to Herøya tonight and Skien on Saturday. It’s wonderful to be able to visit the brothers and sisters and share the bread of life with them. They are waking up to greater treasures in Christ and to an awareness of their inheritance with Him. There’s a lot to do everywhere. The work of bringing forth the hidden life with Christ in God is essentially a hidden work. For this work we have reason to glory in Christ in the things which pertain to God. Romans 15:17. Therefore I’m content with my portion of the inheritance behind the scenes and would like to remain there to the end of my days, since that gives the best results from my work. For this same reason I can’t say so much about the outward results. But what is wrought inwardly by faith and light will, in the course of time, become visible outwardly. But by then, such a long time will have gone by that the honor will have passed over into God’s hands. This is only righteous, as it is He who works in us both to will and to work.

Nevertheless, as a general rule it can be said that people have a greater desire to work in an outward direction than an inward. Therefore we must constantly work to direct the churches inwards, toward the testimony of Christ: the witness of the Spirit, water, and blood — the way through the veil into the sanctuary. The purpose of the priests’ sacrificial ministry is to bring about the obedience of faith. Without all this our work is in vain.

There is an open door here, and by our standards many people are interested. Things are getting brighter everywhere. The warnings and tumult of our opponents come to nothing in the varied workings of grace. The doctrine concerning the mystery of godliness swallows up all opposition from the Antichrist. This is the source of our joy and strength for further victory. Greet your family and the brothers and sisters.

Loving greetings from all of us here.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, December 29, 1940 — # 276


Dear Brother X, Peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter. Yes, you did the right thing regarding the matter of Christmas; and it was also good that you got out an old copy of Skjulte Skatter that had an article about it.

The thing is, God has confined everything under sin in order that He might have mercy upon all. You can take examples from east and west and from north and south and make anything sinful.

Once there were two brothers who decided that it was a sin to say Vær så god, [a common Norwegian expression meaning, literally, “Be so good,” much used in daily life] or to say “thank you,” since we’re supposed to give thanks to the Father for all things. They stopped this immediately when I explained to them that vær så god was just a way of being polite and that I wasn’t thereby implying they were really “so good,” for only One is good, and that is God.

One brother wouldn’t have curtains in his home because they restricted the light and were impractical. He has had curtains for many years now. Take starched collars; we can call that vanity and idolatry, because a scarf is much softer and warmer. To eat salmon and beef is idolatry, because herring and potatoes are much cheaper. We could go on ad infinitum.

This is a case of “mumps” — spiritual mumps. And those who have mumps need to be kept in quarantine until they get better, because mumps are contagious.

Covetousness, adultery, etc. are idolatry because they dwell in the body and make their demands all year long. But we soon get tired of a Christmas tree, which we put up once a year and after two or three weeks throw out. The idea of doing away with the Christmas tree is no new revelation from God. It is an old concocted notion that has no support in the Word of God.

Hold firmly to what you have heard and learned, and never deviate from it. It is better to celebrate the remembrance of Jesus’ birth than to have a pagan feast with drinking and dancing in the middle of winter. For that matter, where is it written that Jesus was born in the summer? And what difference does it make, anyway? For us, the darkest time of year is the best time to celebrate Christmas. We need to be spiritually flexible; then we’ll understand things much more easily.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 25, 1941 — # 277


Dear Brother X,

God’s perfect peace!

Hearty thanks for your good letter and for the zeal you show. It was a joy for me to hear about the good conference you had in Bergen. This Pentecost there will be a brothers’ conference in Horten, and brothers from Stavanger are very welcome to come.

My calling and election is to abide in quietness. I cannot, in good conscience, travel around and hold meetings for the multitudes. If by God’s grace I can win a disciple here and there, I will be thankful and happy for that. They, in turn, can pursue their calling. I hope you understand. One mustn’t uproot the center of the circle and place it on the periphery, nor should one load a boat in such a way that the bow or stern comes out of the water. It must be properly trimmed.

A conference is like a great fireworks display, but it is the quiet hours spent reading the Scriptures in the leading of the Spirit that put marrow in one’s bones. Therefore, if God gives grace, health, and opportunity, I would very much like to come and visit you in all quietness — outside of conference times — because I’ve heard a lot of good things about the brothers and sisters in Stavanger. I only hope you won’t be disappointed by my weakness, since I can no longer see well enough to read. My eyesight deteriorated rapidly about two months ago.

We had good conferences in Brevik and Drammen at Easter. There’s also a lot to take care of here in eastern Norway. The most difficult thing is to find capable workers. People acquire a huge amount of knowledge, but don’t have a proportional amount of ballast. Then they hoist all the sails and, despite their great learning, capsize. What means most to them is to be as visible as possible.

This, too, is vainglory. Rejoicing in other peoples’ light and sailing fully rigged doesn’t stop one keeling over on the day of storm.

Greet your family and the brothers and sisters. Loving greetings. Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, May 28, 1942 — # 278


Dear Brother X,

Peace!

Thank you for your letter.

My understanding regarding Y is that he was a very zealous brother who tried his utmost to do what was right, but did it in a legalistic way instead of according to the workings of the Spirit. One of the results of this was that he worked a lot and ate little, and when he looked at the other brothers and sisters, it seemed to him that they were trailing far behind him.

Many years ago a book was printed in Danish, translated from the German, with the title German Theology. I reckon that this book was written about a hundred years before Luther. It describes people who stray from the faith and who want to be like Jesus Christ in eternity, or like God Himself. They exalt themselves over the church and want to be prophets for it. What is lacking is that they have not grown up to Him who is the head in a natural way according to the Spirit. Instead, they have only attained to those heights in their imagination, through a spirit of deception. Consequently they become strong in themselves, conceited, and self-righteous. They do not take their proper places in the church as members of the body, nor can they work together in a natural way with the other members. They are “more” than the whole church, and stand above it like spiritual dictators.

This is what it means to be puffed up. I must assume that brother Y was in the state described above, and the situation became unbearable for him when he realized he had made a mistake.

I see in your letter that you have warned him and exhorted him to take things differently, but to no avail. Consequently you can’t be blamed for what’s happened; learn a lesson from it, and watch intently so that this doesn’t happen again.

Brother Theodor Ellefsen passed away in faith in his Savior on the 21st of this month at 4:05 p.m., at the age of 66. His funeral took place in Horten on the 26th at 2:00 p.m. Directly after the funeral we all gathered in the hall for a memorial feast. Brothers and sisters from many places came to the funeral. Brother Ellefsen was described as a quiet and very hard working brother. During World War I, he was active mainly in Finnmark and on the west coast. After he left the Navy he moved to Fredericia [Denmark], where he worked for four years in south Jutland. His work has borne fruit everywhere. He understood how to comfort and encourage, so his ministry was closest to that of being a shepherd.

I’m unable to write because of my failing eyesight, so this letter has been dictated.

Loving greetings from all of us here to you, your family, and the church.

Your brother,

J. O. Smith





Horten, October 13, 1942 — # 279


Dear Brother X, and Brothers and Sisters in Stavanger,

May God’s perfect peace be with you all!

Today I went to the permit office to apply for a pass to come to the conference in Stavanger, but the application was immediately rejected. So we’ll just have to do as Brorson sings in a song: “Let come what may, the Word eternally shall abide.” I have sensed your love in the Spirit for a long time now, and it would have been a great joy for me to visit you. But for the time being, it is not God’s will, so we must just rest in that.

The church in Stavanger is relatively new; nevertheless, it has a good reputation because of its zeal and godliness. Just as Christ could do nothing without guidance from the Father, neither can the church (the body of Christ) do anything — it can’t even survive — without the guidance of the Holy Spirit. Without revelation from God, strife, argument, and division arise. Sects and factions spring up and fellowship in the Spirit disappears. Human reason takes the lead, and this results automatically in respect of persons and people seeking their own. Then the church sinks, and all that remains is a dead assembly.

This must not happen with you in Stavanger. For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, and this one body is the body of Christ. This one body is at the Holy Spirit’s disposal, and the flesh with its lusts and desires is crucified. The Spirit of God rules, and the flesh has no say whatsoever. Here, the elders in the church have a very serious responsibility to be vigilant both in regard to themselves and to the whole church, lest carnal elements arise and take the lead. Remember the angels of the churches of Asia Minor who were, on the whole, weak; they yielded to strong personalities with their own personal opinions, which deviated from the Spirit and teachings of Christ. My prayer and the longing of my heart for you in Stavanger is, therefore, that there may always be men among you who have an ear to hear so that they can hear what the Spirit says to the church. This will encourage and maintain unity in the Spirit, and the church’s prosperity and growth will be apparent both to God and men.

The foundation of the church is laid outside the camp. Always make sure that it remains there, because there the head of the church, its Overseer and Savior, is found. Out there, we will experience reproach from all flesh. Nevertheless, we prosper extremely well there, because we are firmly convinced that He who believes will receive the honor. This faith comes from God and His beloved Son, Jesus Christ. What does it matter if all flesh is doing its utmost to conceal this glorious, precious body of Christ with its covering of reproach? Isn’t the reproach of Christ a tremendous treasure for us, just as it was for Moses? It gives us the opportunity to be alone outside the camp with Him who walked there in the days of His flesh and who, even today, keeps His body there — outside the camp.

I will, therefore, as Paul writes to the church in Ephesus, pray that God might give you the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him. This is received through faith, attentiveness, and obedience. We need to be exercised in these areas.

To close, I want to wish you all a rich development in our Lord Jesus Christ, and a blessed conference.

A loving greeting to all of you from your brother and co-worker, well satisfied in honor and reproach,

J. O. Smith





Horten, April 19, 1943 — # 280


Dear Brother X,

May God’s grace and power be upon you in your work!

Hearty thanks for the three letters I’ve now received from you! It’s always a joy to hear about your work in the Lord. Actually we all understand very little about the body, where all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. And if we think that we understand things, we know nothing yet as we ought to know. Even one little step on the way of Cain is from Satan, and the smallest hole we dig for another is big enough for us to fall into. Nevertheless, one thing I say to you, and I say it to everyone: “Watch!” All of us, now and again, need an exhortation so that we don’t go astray and get sidetracked from the new and living way.

I’m really thankful for the work you are doing there among brothers and sisters, old and new. When, in addition to this, you work with souls who are not yet born of the word of truth, you have both the old and the new, which demands your energy, love, strength, and wisdom.

It would have been profitable to speak together now and again, but that is difficult in these troubled times. Therefore we need to be doubly watchful.

Life here is quiet and peaceful, bearing in mind that we are restricted to a 30 kilometer zone which includes Drøbak, Stokke, and Sande. We’ve had good conferences in Hokksund, where many people attended. After the last conference, I visited my son Helge and his wife in Mjøndalen and blessed their little daughter, Eva. The Hokksund conferences have had a powerful effect on the young people in the Drammen area, so now they are a lot more zealous and enthusiastic than they were before.

Recently, I was at a local conference which is held monthly in Porsgrunn. I could clearly see that the brothers and sisters were making great progress.

I am going to give you a recipe for some excellent texts about Urim and Thummim (light and perfection): Exodus 28:28, Deuteronomy 33:8–11, Leviticus 8:6, Numbers 27:18, 1 Samuel 28:5, 1 Samuel 3:1, 1 John 2:27, Ezra 2:63, and James 1:17. If you put Urim and Thummim in the context of the seven churches in Asia Minor, you can see how difficult it is to be perfect in one’s ministry. We have our Urim and Thummim in the Anointed One — Jesus Christ, because in the anointing we know all things.

Greet the brothers and sisters, and loving greetings to you from your brother,

J. O. Smith





Excerpts from various letters


God is exact, so we must keep His commandments exactly, otherwise things will go wrong. This applies to the individual and to the church as a whole. God tests the hearts and minds. He seeks those who fear Him, those who love Him with all their heart. He exalts such people, but abases the unfaithful. No one can alter this law in any way. Therefore, it pays to be uncompromisingly honest, so that one doesn’t capsize, for God avenges all guile, unfaithfulness, and lying. He cannot abide evil. But He raises the poor from the dust — those who are faithful and upright — and sets them among princes, the princes of His people. Therefore, we must take care that we become “first-commandment” Christians, as Wetterlund put it.

* * *

God gave us His Son, Jesus Christ, to be head over all things to the church, which is His body (Ephesians 1, from verse 20), over powers, over authorities, over might and dominion, over unbelief, over a downcast spirit, over people. The body of Christ — the church — is placed above all this. We have fellowship with one another in these heavenly heights. Why, then, allow oneself to be tormented by spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places? Why be made miserable by the sons of disobedience in whom this spirit is working? That is sheer unbelief. Believe the Word of God, and let it stand fast. See Colossians 1.

* * *

Be attentive and obedient to your heavenly calling and to the leading from above. Be an independent person — think for yourself and hear for yourself, read for yourself in the Scriptures, and judge and discern for yourself in everything. Then you will become spiritual and useful in the Lord’s service.

* * *

1) In church gatherings it is quite natural for the women to cover their heads when they pray. It’s written that this is because of the angels. The manifold wisdom of God is to be made known by the church to the principalities and powers in heavenly places. Ephesians 3:10. It looks as if the angels view the church from the outside and thereby get an insight into the manifold wisdom of God. They desire to look into the mysteries of Christ, but they are unable to do so. They must therefore follow things from the outside. This is probably because the angels do not have flesh and blood as we do, and because Jesus didn’t take upon Himself the nature of angels. See 1 Peter 1:12, Hebrews 1, from verse 5, and Hebrews 2:5 and 16.

Therefore the woman should have a sign of submission on her head.

2) When praying as a family (devotions), I would, if I were a woman, cover my head. This is not a point of contention. The angels are certainly present then, too.

3) When praying alone, each one should follow her own conscience.

4) It is written that we are to pray without ceasing, but of course one can’t go around with a head-covering on all the time; that would be pointless.

5) True godly fear teaches me how to behave in all circumstances. When I pray, while standing before the face of God and the angels, I always take my hat off, even if I am alone. It’s different when I am working or out walking; then I leave my hat on, because I regard this as a prayer falling into the “pray without ceasing” category.

* * *

I hear there is a good understanding among you. This is a result of each one having a direct connection with the Head — Christ. One can then appraise everything much more clearly and be more tolerant of others’ weaknesses. Christ has time to speak to us all, and by faith we enter into this personal communion with Him.

The ministry of the Spirit is manifold, because the wisdom of God is manifold, and because there are manifold needs. I realize that many Christians have the testimony of the Spirit and the water, like Apollos, who taught accurately the things of the Lord, although he knew only the baptism of John. But Jesus came not only by water, but by water and blood. The blood was brought into the sanctuary. Our spirit is also brought into the sanctuary along with the blood. This brings a joy that is full of glory. With just the testimony of the water and the Spirit, the body remains intact and whole. The body of sin within remains untouched. But the testimony of the blood goes on the attack against sin in the flesh and makes a way through the veil. This is what causes division between those Christians who only have the testimony of the water and those who have both these testimonies in the Holy Spirit.

The years pass so quickly. Fifty-six years of my life have already rolled by. How needful it is to consider eternity and prepare for it. God has done everything so well. We don’t celebrate the Jewish festivals, but we do have conferences and special occasions that are refreshing variations in our everyday lives.

* * *

The letter from sister X wasn’t very encouraging. But that’s how it goes when one runs from pillar to post, from person to person, asking their advice yet not seeking God to get His light in the matter. Besides, one shouldn’t be too quick to believe people who only rejoice in the light. People in the time of John the Baptist did this, too. When a soul is upright, the light will penetrate bones and marrow, so that he becomes utterly unclothed and naked. In this condition he is able to retain the light. First the breaking down, then the building up. One can’t build a habitation of God in the Spirit on the volcano of the old man. It will only erupt again, and the whole work will have been in vain. You know from experience how long it took to come to a deep acknowledgment. We meet many disappointments in our ministry, but that must not make us discouraged. We must go on trying, but learn from past experience.

Hold firmly to what you have, to what has made you happy and will one day make you blessed. No opponent will prevail over you when you stand unshakably firm. God has given you of His knowledge, which is worth more than any human knowledge about Him. Endure hardship as a good soldier of Jesus Christ. Lay hold of eternal life.

* * *

If the Son makes you free, you will be free indeed. In other words, any bonds besides those of the Son are not freedom. But there are also bonds knit in Christ, bonds by which we grow up to the head. These are blessed bonds. Paul had no one like-minded except Timothy, for all sought their own. This was as far as the ministry was concerned. Therefore, in our ministry for Christ we must loose every bond and allow souls to be free, so that in this freedom they can grow up to mature manhood. The lambs and sheep, however, must be watched over in this freedom so they don’t become entangled in new bonds or endangered by wolves.

God’s ways are wonderful. Everything depends on faithfulness and on abiding in God’s rest. If we come out of rest, disturbances can come which move us from our firm ground. This can lead to the first being last and the last, first. The righteousness of God comes to the fore here also, even though the gifts and the calling of God are irrevocable.

May we be so apprehended by the truth that we become more and more a personification of the truth, just as our Lord Jesus Christ is the Truth.

Devote yourself completely and absolutely to serving others, and forget yourself. You will find your joy and liberation in this. Personally, I have plenty to do all the time. God is good; He gives health and strength.

* * *

It is indeed possible to draw near to the gates of death in the midst of the church. Only true godly fear can sustain and lead one forward. For all His faithful ones, God’s wondrous path runs very near the cliff’s edge, but they will neither stumble nor go astray. It never ceases to amaze me how you have been able to find your way out of this maze of difficulties, but when God gives light, nothing is impossible. Personally, I love truth and righteousness with every fiber of my being, but I feel I haven’t always been able to find the right solution fast enough. Nevertheless, by God’s grace, I have sought to help those who were in need — if only I had eyes to see who they were and where they were. Pray that God will help me to see clearly in this area. Things of great value are hanging in the balance here, and much can be saved which would otherwise be lost. Always new areas, new difficulties, and new help. This demands a high degree of vigilance. May God help us to be alert here.

* * *

I hear you are very sick. We prayed for you at the meeting. When I pray, I strive in prayer to God for your healing. This is a test; just be strong and patient, and God will make everything turn out well. For with the temptation God will also make the way of escape, that we may be able to bear it. God scourges every son whom He receives. If we are without chastening, we are illegitimate.

I do not believe this sickness is to death. Just be strong in hope and faith. Satan is furious about the work of God that’s been going on in your home town. A couple of years ago, I was at a place in Jutland [Denmark] with brother Aslaksen. Late one evening we came home to the house where we were staying. The lady of the house cross-examined me interminably, especially about Romans 7, while her husband sat and listened. I was worn out and exhausted, and the woman would neither be convinced nor give up.

I slept in one room and brother Aslaksen in another. When at last I was able to go to bed, I was assailed by an invisible power which squeezed my body, making me freeze and shudder horribly. I felt like I was going to die. It must have been evil spirit powers who in their fury were attacking me. In my need I prayed to God for deliverance. Suddenly I felt warm again and fell asleep. The next day I recounted this to brother Aslaksen, who said he had noticed I was very pale, and had prayed for me during the night.

I’ve also noticed the attacks of Satan previously when significant things are happening in the spirit world, so I am not ignorant of his devices. I want you to be aware of these things, because the Prince of Darkness loses his hold and becomes powerless when light shines into the situations. So let us hope that God in His grace gives you all the help you need.

God is working powerfully in K. at the moment. But when God works, people become enraged; the evil within them is provoked. It is Satan who is raging. Let us resist him, steadfast in the faith, and he will flee from us; for his head, his leadership, has been crushed under the feet of Christ. The body is dead because of sin. Satan is trying to attack the body; nonetheless, it is a temple of the

Lord. Christ rose again in His body, and we, too, can find help for our bodies, because Christ overcame while He was in His body. Now our bodies are members of Christ, from which Satan can be driven out by faith.

* * *

I just opened the Bible to find a word for you, since I didn’t really know how to begin. Without searching, I saw this at first glance: “If you would earnestly seek God and make your supplication to the Almighty, if you were pure and upright, surely now He would awake for you, and prosper your rightful dwelling place. Though your beginning was small, yet your latter end would increase abundantly.” Job 8:5–7.

Your calling and election stands firm from God’s side, but you must make it sure. You must not doubt or be unbelieving. Pray humbly for grace, and from now on be careful — very careful — to take up your cross every day. For the sake of the brothers and sisters, you must take heed to your calling and election, because their relationship to you and the way God has joined the body together demand it. Therefore, be strong and very bold. Strengthen the feeble knees, and make straight paths for your feet.

You must not let your feelings lead you astray. A person who bears responsibility has no time to give himself over to feelings. The joy of responsibility is in ordering things rightly so that the others can rejoice. This is the joy that you should seek. Let all the others exult in a childlike joy over their salvation. You should rejoice over the things that pertain to your calling. Personally, I’ve never been able to give myself over to jubilation. The responsibility and the work involved in the ministry has been too overwhelming for that. But the peace of faith, the full assurance of faith, and the joy of working in the Spirit fill us with the joy of salvation — and much more.

So, cast all these gloomy memories overboard and get going as a minister of the Lord and not as an “enlisted man.” It takes faith to resist Satan so that he flees from us. Remember that, as a rule, the sufferings of Job are the greatest grace.

* * *

Thank you for your letter. I’m pleased that you have come to rest. But you should be aware that you can have rest in God even in times of intense battle against the spiritual hosts of wickedness in the heavenly places. As a rule, these battles come through people who allow themselves to be influenced by spiritual powers. When such battles come, don’t be fooled into thinking that rest has disappeared. When victory is won, your rest will be even deeper. Remember that! Be strong and very courageous. I’m speaking from experience and from the Scriptures.

* * *

Concerning baptism and the Lord’s Supper: It is best that you take care of these ministries among the brothers and sisters there. None of us has any monopoly on these ministries, but it is most natural that the brother with responsibility in each place carry them out when the occasion arises. Personally, I regard what you have already done to be correct.

* * *

Thank you for your two letters. My opinion concerning brother X is as follows: One should always show kindness to the poor, especially to those in one’s own midst (see 2 Corinthians 9:6–15); however, one should not and must not impose more on the brothers and sisters than they can bear. Everything must be done voluntarily — not by constraint.

All of us pay taxes to the government. They, in turn, as God’s stewards, distribute according to different needs. This authority is established by God. Since these authorities help those in need, and brother X is in need, he ought to accept the help he can get from that quarter. Even though the brothers and sisters are poor, they pay their taxes. But when there is someone in the church whose conscience won’t allow him to receive aid from the government, then the brothers and sisters’ tax burden is even greater than that of other citizens. You can give yourself a bad conscience about anything. The ravens brought food for Elijah, but I would have thought that those who dispense aid in the government were better than many ravens!

If there are those who are in any doubt about such things, they should seek advice before making a final decision. However, this is such a straightforward matter that I’m amazed that people would make an issue of such things. I have been on the government payroll for most of my adult life. Others have had their salaries paid by the municipal government. If I live long enough, I’ll get a pension. Should I actually refuse to accept it and give myself a bad conscience about the matter? Am I supposed to sponge off those who are poor in the church instead? Neither as a ministering brother nor as a member of the body does brother X have the slightest right to make demands on the church. That each of us individually is to remember the poor, as we have opportunity, is another matter altogether.

Greet brother X, and tell him that he can receive in good conscience what the municipal government offers him. That’s far better than putting a tax burden on brothers and sisters in the church who are poor to begin with.

* * *

Thank you for your letter that came today. You and X have lent the money you wrote about in good faith, so I am not going to upbraid you; the outcome of the matter is punishment enough. But I will say that no one has the right to lend money to others that he himself has borrowed. For that matter, lending money and guaranteeing other people’s loans is something we should try to avoid, because doing so invariably creates problems. Now you have a debt that is almost unmanageable, and you’re asking me for advice. The Scriptures say that we should owe no man anything except to love one another. I believe that the work you plan to start now will succeed. Obviously you must do everything within your power to pay off your debt.

Be very careful in money matters. Never get involved in things like this within the church without first seeking advice. The advice will almost always be against such involvement. We can and should give alms and gifts to the needy according to our means, but if somebody comes wanting thousands, say “No!” without hesitation. You would have been spared from all this if you had sought advice. The world is full of swindlers — keep them at a distance.

Why should they take table and chair and bed from you? I know you will be more careful another time, but we need to hear these things again and again.

If you determine in your heart to pay all your bills and repay this debt, God will bless your work. But you must pray for His blessing; then you will see that the difficulty is not insurmountable. May God bless you to that end.

I’ve received several letters from X. These letters indicate that matters still need to be put right in the heart, not just according to the letter. Whether knowingly or unknowingly, a human pressure has been brought to bear upon the church in Y. This pressure has undoubtedly come from brother Z. He must acknowledge this from his heart and repent of it, then the situation will right itself. If he understands this, yet will not acknowledge it, he will prove himself even less a servant of the church. But if he does understand and he accepts the blame personally from the heart, confidence in him will, in time, be restored.

We are to serve the church, not be lords over it. The brothers and sisters must feel free from all pressure and demands. Godliness must be voluntary; therefore, they must be exhorted and encouraged as free people and not threatened like drudges and slaves.

* * *

My opinion concerning X is that he has judged himself sufficiently. It is not right for him to take the blame for everything. Several of the older sisters have looked up to this brother as though he were a god. They have failed to take into account his youth and lack of maturity as a servant in the church. In spite of all that has been preached about this, these sisters have expected everything from this young servant of the Lord. They have just swallowed everything without testing things themselves, and now they’ve come into difficulty. It’s only right and proper that the older brothers and sisters judge themselves here. When they’ve done this, everything will sort itself out.

My advice to everyone is to be on guard against being unmerciful and making demands on brother X for things his conscience does not reprove him for.

“Blessed are the merciful, for they shall obtain mercy.” Matthew 5:7. Take this word to heart and be done with all accusations, for there comes a time for each one of us when we need to be shown mercy. Then it is good to have shown mercy ourselves.

If someone is still not satisfied with the way things have been settled, I won’t intervene single-handedly. I will bring the eldest brothers in the church with me, and we will examine things more closely. However, we will also look into the motives of those who are making greater demands now than at the original settlement.

My exhortation, in all love, to anyone who feels wronged by the way things have been settled, is this: Choose rather to suffer wrong.

God’s grace and peace be with us all. Your brother, always fighting for the cause of peace.

* * *

Those who have children are responsible for supporting them. I have never read about the apostle Paul begging money for Peter, or Peter for Paul. But Paul did take up a collection for the poor saints in Jerusalem. Our task is to work for God. He, in turn, will fulfill His obligations toward us. It is unbelief not to trust Him for this. The laborer is worthy of his hire. But it’s the person he works for who gives him his wage. And He has said: “I will never leave you nor forsake you.”

To put pressure on the church to give money is totally counterproductive. This results in an aversion to giving what one otherwise would cheerfully and willingly give.

It’s important to be watchful, so that cares about what to eat and what to drink do not dull the senses of the one who should be a forerunner. It could end in disaster. It could even go so far that no one who is really poor dares to visit him, only those who have something to give or who can do the housework for him.

As for X, he assumed that it meant a great deal to us to keep him and the other person. This was a platform from which Satan sought to gain an entrance. If we had needed their money and their flesh, he would have succeeded, and ravening wolves could have scattered the flock. When the situation became fairly clear to me, I told them that we had no need of their money and that they could forget any obligation they might have felt toward us. I said that as far as we were concerned they could just get out. That looked and sounded terrible, but it disarmed them. Afterwards they didn’t have any power to resist us. They just made some carnal “growling.” Sooner or later we would have had to deal with all this evil if it hadn’t come out now. X admitted that he had become bitter toward someone. Bitter zeal against others is the work of evil spirits.

I want to encourage you, dear brother, to train yourself to ferret out evil spirits that work through people, so that you can war against them directly. We need warriors if the “wolves” are to be kept out. The sooner you expose them the better, for then a fear will come over everybody. Train yourself to hear, understand, and “wage war.” That way you will all have peace. Christians know almost nothing about waging spiritual warfare. They must learn to fight. It’s the Lord’s battles we are fighting. Remember that, and learn to fight! Be strong and very courageous. Fear not, the Lord will give you victory. Only when you’ve learned this absolutely vital “art of war” will you have all the necessary reins in your hands. You definitely have the aptitude for being a warrior, but you must be attentive and train yourself in this direction.

* * *

A final day of reckoning is coming when we will have to give account of all that we have done in our bodies. Every kindness and every good deed will then be weighed on the scales. All faithfulness, perseverance, and goodness will weigh heavily, for God loves these things. Against all this, all our foolishness, lack of understanding and errors of judgment will be of little account, as long as our heart has not remained in those things but we have turned away from them toward godliness and goodness. For he who cleaves to the Lord is one spirit with Him.

* * *

We reach our peak at 50 years of age, and old age begins after 60. But I agree with Colonel Bringle of the Salvation Army, who said: “Rejoice with me, for each year is very valuable. Each year I gain a better understanding of the way things are developing, and of God’s leading and guidance; thus I harvest greater riches in God.”

And I would add: We who are blind are content to remain blind until it pleases God to open our eyes on each particular point. We can still have rest, even though we are fully aware of the folly which clings to us until a new vision, a new morning star, and new daylight arises in our hearts. Then the time has come for new judgment, new death, new resurrection, and new growth in the body of Jesus Christ.

So, in the midst of all this we wait, hoping against hope, and learning in this way to be patient and longsuffering. Thus we advance into the Sabbath rest prepared for the people of God. In this rest from our own works we can conduct ourselves in a wise and considerate way toward our brethren on earth, and then continue in fellowship with the saints in all eternity.

* * *

When we forsake the world, there is a way upon which we must begin to walk. This goes through God’s outer court and into the temple of God. Most people never get this far. There are two kinds of Christians: “outer court” Christians, and “temple” Christians. All the denominations are in the outer court. If we heed the Spirit, we progress from the outer court right to the place where we hear the voice of God; this is the temple — the temple of the body. Here we are baptized by one Spirit into one body (temple); we only hear one voice (the voice of the Shepherd). In the temple we find God’s rest. Here is the Word of God, one faith, one Father, one baptism. Blessed are those who have battled through to become “temple” Christians.

* * *

Many thanks for your letter which I received today. You ought to regard those older sisters who preceded you in these truths, and who have shown exemplary conduct, as your fellow helpers. Nevertheless, you should bear the overall responsibility — which should not prove difficult, as long as you see to it that godliness is the ultimate aim and object.

Whether you should advertise music is up to you to decide. It could possibly act as “bait,” but it’s God’s Word that transforms people into what they should be. Don’t put too much emphasis on anything else. However, if X plays, it could help to provide a little variation in the meeting. This might encourage some people to come back. However, we should take care not to exalt music to the sky, because if we do, the “musician” might end up there, too. Don’t let people go on too much about the assemblies where they come from. We, too, should keep strictly to the Scriptures and use them to rebuke the sins of our day and age.

Let wisdom rule, for wisdom will reign in eternity. May God richly bless you in your task. Be faithful to Him. You’ve been a joy to all of us all along; continue to serve in lowliness.

* * *

It is really a blessing of God that your business is prospering and that you can make a living at it. When we remain faithful in little things, I believe God adds His blessing. It’s also good to have enough to do. Nevertheless, wisdom comes by opportunity of leisure, according to Sirach. There is one kind of business that must take precedence over all other business; I think you know what kind of business I’m talking about.

I like it best when, during my tasks at home, I suddenly feel led to go somewhere or other — often that’s been to Oslo. I understand in truth that I am not my own. And strangely enough, it has always fitted to a “T.” God is extremely exact.

* * *

When it comes to giving advice in difficult matters — advice that is to our own disadvantage — we must take care not to dodge the issue.

* * *

Regarding the difficulties you’ve noticed: The Lord will let the staff of the one He has chosen bud. So don’t wage war with carnal weapons, but wait upon the Lord with patience. If he is receptive, try to convince the person of what is wrong. But in all this you must keep your balance, spiritually speaking. A servant of the Lord must be able to suffer wrong. Just a little folly can ruin those who otherwise excel in wisdom, just like a dead fly can putrefy the perfumer’s ointment. Therefore tread carefully in all that has to do with the ministry within the church, for it requires all the patience and longsuffering we possess — and more.

* * *

I was in Oslo for four days. We had blessed meetings every evening and talked together all day long. We spoke about the heavenly city, which is three-dimensional, and about the Spirit with the seven spirits of God (Isaiah 11), which is also three-dimensional. We also spoke about Philippians 3: “Beware of dogs” who are constantly barking about all the outward things. We have a good deal of “dog nature” in us, but God has no place for dogs in the church. The dog must die so that only the Good Shepherd, the lambs, and the sheep remain.

* * *

Jesus is “the door of the sheepfold.” Nearly all preaching consists of “pointing to the door” for people outside it. This is profitable and of benefit to everyone on the outside. But those who have come inside are being ministered to in a way that’s far from fitting and proper. In fact it is even thought to be lopsided and wrongheaded to be engaged in anything except this pointing at the door from the outside. While the forgiveness of sins continues to be preached everywhere, those who have long since come to faith are dying in vast numbers from lack of nourishment. Indeed, those who want to take care of these poor people are even declared to be deceivers. Under such difficult conditions the church is to be nurtured. Blessed is every soul who can run such a gauntlet unscathed. It is no easy task to be a servant of the Spirit. Who is sufficient for these things???

* * *

In Psalm 43 it is written: “Oh, send out Your light and Your truth! Let them lead me; let them bring me to Your holy hill and to Your tabernacle. Then I will go to the altar of God, to God my exceeding joy…”

By God’s light and truth we come to God’s holy hill (separated from everything unholy) and are left alone there. We meet together with His tabernacles — i.e., those persons in whom God’s Spirit dwells and works. We come to God’s altar, where all our self-will is to be sacrificed, and to God our exceeding joy. If we love joy, we will come to it by loving righteousness (truth) and hating lawlessness. This is the way to “God,” our “exceeding joy.”

* * *

Last Wednesday we spoke about how the gaunt cows ate up the seven fine-looking, fat cows, and then Pharaoh awoke. I wonder if it’s not like that nowadays, too. Hans Nilsen Hauge was one of those gaunt creatures in his day, but now he shines, and his persecutors are completely consumed. There is nothing left of them but a black backdrop. In the same way, the Pharisees of Jesus’ day were fine-looking cows, while Jesus had no comeliness. But see how these fine-looking cows were eaten up, while He who had no form or comeliness shines. So let us be content with our lot as ugly, gaunt cows. The fine-looking, fat cows will be eaten up.





Postscript





Excerpts from the 1943 memorial issue of Skjulte Skatter


Johan O. Smith

During the early hours of May 1, our beloved and highly esteemed brother in the Lord, who has been our vigilant, excellent, faithful leader and overseer for so many years, passed away.

Thus the greatest man of God we know of in our generation has finished his course in this world.

He died in his home. The last words he was heard to utter were: “Thanks and praise,” while he was praying and praising God earlier that night. That was indeed a fitting conclusion to a life and a walk such as his. His faithfulness to God and to the light that God gave him was certainly exceptional — so much so, that he must be considered a reformer.

When God gave brother Smith revelation concerning His way — that new and living way which leads through the flesh of Jesus into the Holy of Holies (Hebrews 10:19–20) — he was faithful to this light. He shared it both verbally and in writing with other believers, including those Christian leaders whom he supposed would be best qualified to receive it. However, they became his opponents. What one of them said is so typical:

“This is all true enough, but you’ll never win large crowds that way.”

These opponents thought it better to suppress the truth, to resist it, even to warn against it and condemn it, rather than receive it and preach it, since it didn’t result in so many members! What deplorable faithlessness!

All the more reason to highly extol and praise God for brother Smith’s faithfulness! Even though he encountered opposition wherever he turned, he continued faithfully in the light that God had so clearly given him. He chose to risk standing alone for the rest of his life outside the camp, in faithfulness to his Lord and Master, rather than being unfaithful in order to win the recognition of the masses.

What were these truths that had such an effect that not only were the masses not won over, but practically all religious people and their leaders opposed him?

They were: that we are to deny ourselves, take up our cross, and follow in the footsteps of Jesus; that we are actually to do the will of God with our bodies; that we both can and should do His will, that we are called to this very thing, and that God will give us grace and help to this end; that God’s intention is that we should conquer our self and all sin in this world; that we should speak the truth, practice righteousness, humble ourselves — in short, that we should keep God’s commandments, all the laws of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, which the Scriptures so clearly teach and exhort us to do!

Just think — this was what they opposed, and it is still being opposed! Indeed, virtually the entire religious world is unanimous in its opposition to it — to their shame, we must add, but especially to the shame of their leaders, who bear the chief responsibility for such disastrous stupidity!

But brother Smith’s steadfast faithfulness shines and radiates all the more gloriously, a faithfulness that has been richly rewarded, both with respect to the glory of his inner life and with respect to the outward fruits — the effects on hearts and lives! Praised be God!

Brother Smith certainly did not live in vain, he most certainly did not go astray, and he certainly did not dote on controversial questions!

Concerning himself:

Instead of arguing about and championing certain theories, yet in practice being just like other people and ending up like so many other leaders — so dry and empty in their old age that people would rather not have to hear them — brother Smith found the way of life, the way of sanctification, and the way of transformation, and walked upon it. This made him a man of the Spirit — a strong man, burning with zeal, always anointed with fresh oil, with fresh light, and new revelations in the knowledge of God concerning life and ministry in the church, right up to the end!!! It would be hard to find the likes of such a man in all this world!

On this way of life he truly partook of divine nature, in accordance with the teaching of the Scriptures. He was an exceptionally righteous, exact, and truthful man, strong and fearless in declaring what was true and right, both to those of high and those of low estate. At the same time, he was a remarkably meek, longsuffering, and forbearing man, humble and lowly in his own eyes — the complete opposite of religious leaders and “leading lights” in general!

Oh, how much all these people could have learned and received from this precious brother and leader! Instead, they withstood him! And now it’s too late!

With a watchful eye and heart and a spirit without guile, he fulfilled his calling, his gifts, and his ministry throughout all the local churches across the country and those abroad, right up to the end. Our last time together with him was at the conference in Hokksund just before Easter. He was full of spirit and life, blessing and glory — as usual. And by God’s inexpressible grace I was able to share this fellowship and glory with him uninterruptedly for about 35 years — without a single upset. There are those who can appreciate in some measure how significant this is.

Brother Smith was by far the weightiest, most faithful, most beloved, and most blessed man I ever saw or heard. The remembrance of him will be an everlasting blessing. Praised be the Lord! Soon we will be reunited with him, clothed with incorruptible bodies — provided we, too, are faithful to the end.

The fruit of his work:

From being contradicted, opposed, and rejected by everyone everywhere, he experienced the virtual fulfillment of what is written in Isaiah 60:22: “A little one shall become a thousand, and a small one a strong nation. I, the Lord, will hasten it in its time.”

It didn’t exactly go “hastily” to begin with, but then “its time” came. One revival followed another and breakthrough followed breakthrough. Town after town and village after village opened up for these glorious, liberating truths. A great many souls have been saved from the world, and many souls from different camps have had the eyes of their hearts enlightened to a deeper life in God. An indescribably great amount of salvation has occurred.

It wasn’t easy to win anyone in the beginning. It’s hard to accept anything from a man who is contradicted and rejected by all those who are supposed to be well informed about such matters, even though what that man says is true, noble, and good! But God led the right men — one by one — in such a way that their paths crossed brother Smith’s. And as time went by, the truth was received by more and more souls who loved, followed, and preached the truth.

But several years elapsed before the work had grown to such proportions that there was a little flock that met in a small living room in Horten. Yet, as it is written, we are not to despise the day of small beginnings. And though the flock was small and difficult to become a part of, it was by its very nature that much more viable and full of the germ of life; thus it couldn’t help but grow and develop. So what we had found was not just a set of doctrines, but nothing less than life in God.

This is how one man, by his unswerving faithfulness, became a thousand — and more than a thousand — scattered throughout the land of Norway as well as Denmark and other countries.

Nevertheless, it is not the numbers that are so significant; in terms of numbers other movements are even larger. Rather, it is the scope that is important — the breadth and depth of the life in God into which individuals have been brought and the fervent, divine fellowship they enjoy with God and with one another as a consequence, and the victory over sin and the sanctification that, by God’s abundant grace, they have attained to — all of which can be traced back to the life and ministry of this blessed, faithful servant of the Lord.

What unspeakably glorious fruit from one man’s life! What a glorious wreath and crown he has in store! It has happened to him as it is described in Isaiah, chapter 49.

He was also able to enjoy precious fruit such as this: to see all his children walking on the same way, and to see that one of his sons is a valuable, trusted co-worker on the way of God.

Without the slightest possibility of contradiction, these words of Jesus stand fast: “Every good tree bears good fruit, but a bad tree bears bad fruit. A good tree cannot bear bad fruit, nor can a bad tree bear good fruit.” Matthew 7:17–18.

We owe our highly beloved brother, J. O. Smith, an eternal debt of gratitude. Praised be his memory which will never be erased!

Yours,

Elias Aslaksen

Blessed be the memory of the righteous

Proverbs 10:7

Father died peacefully and went to be with Jesus on May 1, at 2:00 a.m. He was 71 1/2 years old.

He had grown somewhat weak physically, and his eyesight had become so poor that he could neither read nor write. But though his body was weak, he was more vibrant spiritually than ever before, and his spiritual vision was not dimmed.

The day before Good Friday he visited the brothers and sisters in Tønsberg and participated in the breaking of bread. There he spoke with blessing and power concerning the way of God and the way of Cain. When he came home from that trip, he felt tired and worn out and was confined to bed for a few days. The day before he passed away he felt quite well and was up and about.

By the amazing leading of God, my brother Helge and I had come home quite unexpectedly, arriving about four hours before Father passed away. He received us with a firm, hearty handshake, welcomed us home, and asked with interest about how the meetings were going in Hallingdal, where I had been working with the gospel. He was pleased that it was going well with the various local churches, and he especially rejoiced over the power and zeal of the young people.

At midnight he was in bed, praising God. The last thing my brother heard him say as he was about to retire that night was: “Yes, thanks and praise.” About two hours later, as he was about to cross the floor, God called him home. He had a heart attack. Father’s death took us by surprise, since he had been feeling quite well the day before. But God knew the exact hour, and Father was awake and ready. Though it is unspeakably painful to be separated here, it is only for a short time; soon we shall meet again.

Everyone in our family is saved, and that was a great joy for Father. We could all kneel down there at Father’s bedside that night and praise God for our father’s blessed life and example. I have never seen Father out of rest or impatient. He was in God’s blessed rest and peace, and it was refreshing to be around him. He had a broad spiritual perspective; consequently, he was longsuffering and forbearing.

I took a “mannacorn” right after Father passed away and got 1 John 4:15: “Whoever confesses that Jesus is the Son of God, God abides in him, and he in God.” Father was now in God, and God was in him. Father lived his life in God. He spoke and acted in God’s clear light, and he didn’t seek support in the opinions of others. He knew no one according to the flesh, and this enabled him to pass judgments that were impartial and righteous. I have never seen anyone who rejoiced so wholeheartedly over divine truths as Father did. When in the course of conversation someone got light, he slapped his knee and rejoiced heartily. God be praised that Father’s joy is now complete!

There are few who, in writing and speaking, have exalted Jesus Christ both as Son of God and Son of Man the way Father did. He exalted and glorified the name of Jesus in everything he did. And he exhorted us right up to the end to take special pains to ensure that everything we said and did would be to God’s glory.

The military authorities have attested that Father did his work quickly and purposefully; and this is how he was in all his conduct, both in temporal and in spiritual matters. He acted quickly and purposefully according to the Spirit’s promptings in his heart, and he didn’t consult with flesh and blood. He gained much practical wisdom through all that he experienced in life, and he had a vast storehouse of incredibly interesting and blessed things to share, which were edifying and instructive. When conversing with people — whether unsaved, newly converted, or those who had come further in Christ — Father always had a spiritual goal in mind. He had a special gift for speaking in riddles and parables; thus in a striking way he was able to cause light to shine in all kinds of nooks and crannies in the most varied circumstances, with a view to helping each individual to be set free from sin and from their self-life.

My brother Kristian also took a “mannacorn” when Father passed away, and got Luke 12:35–38. What fitting words! Father had indeed girded up the loins of his mind, and his lamp was burning till the end. He was standing, wide awake, in spirit and in body, in the middle of the night, when God took him home.

“Blessed are those servants whom the master, when he comes, will find watching. Assuredly, I say to you that he will gird himself and have them sit down to eat, and will come and serve them. And if he should come in the second watch, or come in the third watch, and find them so, blessed are those servants.”

Father left us a rich inheritance by planting the word of life in our hearts and instructing us thoroughly in righteousness and godliness. Many were the blessed conversations we had with him around the dinner table at home. We will miss him greatly in every way.

Our remembrance of him will live on with an abundance of blessing in our hearts until we meet again.

Aksel J. Smith

Blessed be the memory of Johan O. Smith

God called His greatly beloved and faithful servant home after he had served God’s purpose in his time. Not until the resurrection will it be fully revealed what God accomplished through this man of faith. But even at the present time we see tremendous results of Johan O. Smith’s ministry, and one is at a loss for words when it comes to saying something about it.

God gave me the great grace to spend time together with brother Smith and to get to know him personally, both publicly and privately. When I think of brother Smith, I would say of him what David said of Saul: The sword of Johan O. Smith did not return without drawing blood (2 Samuel 1:22). He was a warrior, and when he spoke the Word of God, everyone had to listen. The words he spoke separated and divided, and judged the thoughts and intents of the heart; the blood of self-life ran. This was the case not only in his public ministry, but when he spoke privately as well. He used to say: “There’s no lack of flesh; on the cross with it!” The word of the cross, which is the power of God unto salvation, characterized his preaching, from beginning to end. He himself, in all his conduct, was the best proof of the power of the cross. It’s written that the Word became flesh and dwelt among us. In brother Smith, the Word became flesh. He lived the Word, and we could feel it and handle it. Just as God’s Word never gets old, but becomes new and quickens us every time we read it, so, too, with brother Smith. He never became “old.” His body did grow weak toward the end, and he couldn’t see very well, but he was always new and life-giving. He received tremendous revelations in the Scriptures right up until the end. The most familiar scriptures became new when he quoted them. His speech, night and day, was only God’s Word. When he spoke about earthly things, he always had a spiritual application. What a brother once said to me was characteristic: “Brother Smith’s letters are interesting. Even if he’s only writing about a suitcase, it’s still edifying.” That was because he lived the Word. When we read that the greatest shall be the servant and slave of all, this was something we saw fulfilled in brother Smith. At the conferences he went about in a quiet, unassuming way and didn’t draw attention to himself. If he happened to see someone standing off by himself looking lonely and withdrawn, brother Smith would go over to him and give him faith and courage. He knew each one personally, and he pleaded the cause of the lowly. And when we read: “Do not set your minds on high things, but associate with the humble,” we can see this fulfilled in brother Smith. He wasn’t eager to preach to large assemblies. No, he was content with just a few people in a living room, and there he expounded the way of God in detail. When God opened the eyes of our hearts so that we could understand what brother Smith was saying, he rejoiced greatly. “Wisdom is the principal thing,” he would often say. “Pray that God may give you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of Him.”

When brother Smith spoke about God’s creation, he used to say: “Look how beautiful everything is that God has made; the more you magnify it, the more beautiful it becomes. So too with God. The more we get to know Him, the greater He becomes for us.” The same could be said of brother Smith as well, which is only natural, since He lived his life in God. The better we got to know him, the greater he became for us. As we associated with him and saw more and more of his private life, we never ceased to be amazed at how he practiced righteousness and showed mercy in minute details. On one occasion he said: “I have a desk job at a government office, and in my spare time I write letters and articles to Skjulte Skatter. But I can’t bring myself to dip my pen in the government’s inkwell; I use my own inkwell.” When we were out traveling together, and stopped at a cafe to eat, he was the first one to pay the bill. I’ve never heard of a collection being taken up for him. And if we succeeded in doing him a favor of some kind, he was alert for opportunities to pay us back many times over. With a life like that as a background, it is not hard to understand why he was able to let the light shine. “Life is the light of man,” he often said. John 1:4. It wasn’t dead doctrines that he preached, but life. So it is hardly surprising that the religious world, with all its unrighteousness, rose up in opposition to the light that came forth from brother Smith’s ministry. No matter how much they “claimed the blood” or invoked God’s grace, the light shone through anyway. The blood is not for covering up sin, but for cleansing it away; and grace is given to discipline us. Titus 2:11–12 [Norw.]. When brother Smith proclaimed the message of the blood and the grace of Jesus, it wasn’t all that rare to see these religious sinners head for the door in a rage.

Because he was a man of faith, brother Smith understood to be in God’s leading. We felt so safe when he was with us, and so secure in his counsel. And even if difficulties came, we knew that everything would work out. Once we had planned an open air meeting at Tonsåstoppen. The weather had been bad, but brother Smith was to be there, so we had no misgivings. The day came, the weather cleared up, and we went to Tonsåstoppen in trucks. A lot of people came from far and near. When it was just about time to start the meeting, the sky grew dark and rain threatened. As brother Smith came up to testify, it had actually begun to drizzle; even a few snow flakes were falling. The local café was far too small to hold so many people. So brother Smith lifted up his hands and asked God to drive the clouds away so that we could have our meeting. Then he took out his Bible and began reading. The rain stopped and the sun came out. Two unsaved men turned to each other and said: “Now that was power!”

“This gospel is just the thing for young people,” he often said. And the fruit of his preaching is a flock of young people all over Norway and in other countries. Once an older man came to one of our conferences, and what he said was typical: “There are only young people here, so it looks like I’m too old.” However, there are older people among us, and they become young again and, like eagles, they lift their wings to do God’s will for whatever time they have left.

Young people gathered around brother Smith, and my memory of that stalwart, white-haired man in the midst of the young people will never be erased. He held everyone’s interest when he asked and answered questions, joked, and taught. It was as though he never grew tired. When we came home after the evening meeting and sat down to eat, we often didn’t get away from the table until quite late. Many times our conversations lasted far past midnight. He never “ran dry”; he was that way right up until the end. That’s why we never expected to lose him so soon; and it’s sad to think that we will never see him or hear him again in this life. But we who are still alive will do what he wrote in one of his songs: “In our fathers’ steps we’ll go, take the promised land.” He never tried to bind to himself the flock of young people he instructed; he bound them to Christ. As he said so often: “Jesus is the Head, and you are to grow up to Him.” That’s why we have power and life among us to put the light in the lampstand. We will hold forth the word of life, to brother Smith’s praise on the day of Christ, that he neither ran nor worked in vain. Philippians 2:16.

Sigurd Bratlie

Excerpts from the funeral

Brother J. O. Smith’s exceptionally well-used — and well-worn — earthly body was laid to rest Saturday afternoon, May 8. The meeting hall in Horten, as could reasonably be expected, was packed with people, in spite of the stringent travel restrictions that were in effect.

Brother Smith was indeed highly beloved by all the brothers and sisters throughout the country, so they did their utmost to make the journey in whatever way they could. Some, for example, bicycled long distances.

The funeral procession was the longest ever witnessed in Horten. Imagine what it would have been like under normal conditions! Telegrams, letters, and wreaths arrived from various places throughout the country.

In the chapel, brother Elias Aslaksen spoke from Hebrews 13:7– 9: “Remember your guides [Norw.], who have spoken the Word of God to you, whose faith follow, considering the outcome of their conduct … For it is good that the heart be established by grace, not with foods which have not profited those who have been occupied with them.”

At the grave, brother Sigurd Bratlie spoke from Philippians 2:13 to the large crowd: “It is God who works in you both to will and to do for His good pleasure.”

A memorial feast followed, which lasted through the evening. We continued the next day, Sunday, with memorial meetings both morning and afternoon, so there were three memorial meetings in all. It was like the best and most glorious conference! Glory be to God!

Excerpts from the memorial meetings

After a number of telegrams from faraway places had been read by brother Bratlie, he then read aloud a letter that brother J. O. Smith had received on his 9th birthday from his paternal grandfather, and proceeded to explain this remarkable letter.

There have been prophecies concerning Jesus right from the time of Adam. And there have been prophecies concerning various men of God down through time. This letter to brother Smith is a prophecy concerning his life’s work and battle. His paternal grandfather, who wrote the letter, was a godfearing man far ahead of his time, a humble man who was not afraid to speak the truth. The letter reads as follows:



Fredrikstad, April 11, 1881

This being the first time I write to my dear grandson, Johan Kristiansen Smith, your beloved grandfather and grandmother send their heartfelt thanks for your letter to us two old people, which was so full of goodness, respect, and insight. You have a good hand, and God has given you a strong heart; but don’t forget to thank God and His Son Jesus, and always take care to give Him back the strength of your whole heart in Christian virtue, in the virtues of the cross of Jesus’ love. For all virtues that are outside of Jesus are evil blemishes, and my prayer to God and Jesus is that He might preserve you from the “darkness” that shines at midday. But I will pray God and Jesus that He will give you the light of His Holy Spirit, that you, my grandson Johan Kristiansen, may receive the light of Jesus that shines into the darkness of the noonday.

I see that you have been a diligent son at school, and that the crown* of your dear father, which was promised you, has been your goal. God has also prepared, for every human being, a crown to be his portion. But we don’t receive this crown unless we walk toward the crown. And this blessed way — the way of the cross of Jesus Christ — is the way of love, the Father’s way to the crown. And he who works for crowns also gets many stars in his crown.

“A little seed is laid in the ground. By sun and air and water, a tree is drawn from the seed. By the dew of heaven, blossoms shoot forth first; thereafter, ripened fruit for the harvest of Jesus Christ.” Your grandfather wrote this verse. And you, my grandson, practice writing. This sharpens our spiritual mind, which looks into secret things that no human being has understood before. This has always been the work of great men of God: to put their spiritual thoughts on paper, to the furtherance of God’s glory. (Remember this.)

I want to ask you, Johan Kristiansen, to keep this letter all your life. Write soon.

Johan Kristiansen


* There is a play on words in this letter. The Norwegian word krone (crown) can refer to money (coin) or to a monarch’s crown.



As we can see, this is an unusual letter. Brother Smith’s father, who was also a very godfearing man, kept the letter, and brother Smith got it back only in 1915. By that time he had already been publishing Skjulte Skatter for three years together with his brother, the dentist Aksel Smith. Brother Smith once told what great comfort this letter was to him. His life’s work had become so established by that time that it was possible to see the fulfillment of the prophetic element in the letter.

It is remarkable that already as an eight or nine-year-old boy brother Smith had written a letter that was “full of goodness, respect and insight.” These three virtues characterized his life. He treated everyone with respect and goodness, and his insight into the mysteries of God and in practical life was overwhelming.

Brother Smith had a strong heart, and he followed the exhortation. He “gave it back” in the virtues of Christ, “in the virtues of the cross of Jesus’ love.” This is like a prophecy concerning that gospel of the cross which brother Smith proclaimed with such might.

“The ‘darkness’ that shines at midday.” Paul writes that people in the end times will have a form of godliness, but deny its power. A confession without life and a form without power is truly “darkness at midday.” It isn’t easy to find a better expression. It’s as though his grandfather is designating brother Smith as a reformer in this area. This has been fulfilled, perhaps much more than his grandfather could ever have imagined. Brother Smith let the light of Jesus shine with great power into this midday “darkness” — into this form of religiosity. That’s why it happened to him as to all true prophets; they have been branded as deceivers and have been persecuted. The name “Smith” strikes fear in the hearts of paid preachers and all those who want to get a name at the expense of the gospel. Indeed, it has happened to him as it happened to Jesus: Rejected by men, but chosen by God and precious. 2 Corinthians 6:8 and 1 Peter 2:4.

His grandfather writes: “We do not receive this crown unless we walk toward the crown, and this is that blessed way — the way of Jesus’ cross….” To illustrate how powerfully brother Smith has proclaimed this way: There was a man, a believer, who had had some contact with us and had been to one of our conferences. Not long afterward there was a Christian conference in the valley where he lived, and he attended, since he belonged to that denomination. During a conversation with some who were at the conference, this man happened to remark: “Yes, but there is a way to go.” “A way?” came the reply. “You wouldn’t happen to belong to that group they call ‘Smith’s Friends,’ would you?” That’s all it took. Religious people are not willing to go the way to the crown. They just sit there with their hands in their laps and wait for the blessing to fall upon them. We praise God because brother Smith received grace to preach the new and living way which Jesus consecrated through the veil — that is, His flesh. Hebrews 10:19–20. And the prophecy has been fulfilled: brother Smith has indeed received many stars in his crown.

Even the little verse that his grandfather wrote is a brief prophecy concerning that which brother Smith was instrumental in developing. We have to admit that it began as a tiny seed. The beginnings were as lowly as they could possibly be, and the external development has gone very slowly. This is the way God does it when He chooses a people. It took a long time before Abraham was made a nation. On the other hand, both Ishmael and Esau straightaway became a great nation with many princes. Genesis 25:16 and 36:31. But now this tiny seed, which is what brother Smith was to begin with, has become a tree. It blossoms and bears ripe fruit for the harvest of Jesus Christ. We are living in the end times, and there is a harvest in a double sense of the word. This tree is in a time of rapid growth and development. All the storms that have raged against this tree down through the years have caused it to put down strong roots, roots that have become firmly anchored in Jesus Christ. And those storms that may yet come against this tree will not prevail before Jesus comes to fetch the firstfruits.

Brother Smith’s grandfather exhorts him to practice writing verse and prose, to put his spiritual thoughts on paper, to the furtherance of God’s glory. “Remember this,” he writes. And that’s just what brother Smith did. He has written a wealth of articles in various Christian publications; he has written books and many songs. His grandfather was actually prophesying about Skjulte Skatter as well. And brother Smith was able to look into mysteries that have been hidden for many generations. This has in truth resulted in the furtherance of God’s glory.

His grandfather must have sensed that there was something prophetic in the letter he wrote, because he asked brother Smith to keep it for the rest of his life. And after getting it back in 1915, this is exactly what he did — a great joy for all of us who remain after him.

* * *

Kristian Smith (his oldest son)

Father was glad that I, too, got converted. “Rejoice always!” He was always happy, and I have taken this word to heart. The night Father died, this verse came to me, so I could praise God even then. Father said recently: “I’m getting old and weak, and soon my time will be over here on earth, but you are all welcome to follow me.” We must pray in order to follow Father. He lived such a rich life. Everyone sought him out, both great and small. After his eyesight began to fail, his mail was read to him, and he rejoiced greatly over the good reports of the work with the gospel. He would often ask my sister Rakel to read these letters for others so that they, too, could rejoice.

As long as his eyesight was good, he did everything himself, because he didn’t like to be a burden. Father was never downcast. I thank God for the inspiration that he was. He lived in the renewing power of the cross. A freely running waterfall is a beautiful sight to behold, but its inherent power is wasted. But when the water is guided through turbines, it can perform a host of useful things. It brings light and warmth and much else that is of use. I thank God for everything.

* * *

Rakel Bratlie (his daughter)

I thank God for our dear father’s life, for his blessed life in the home, for the good father that he was. The fruit of the Spirit — love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, etc. — was always manifested in Father’s life. His life was like that right to the very end. He was thankful for the least little thing. He bore fruit that was fully ripened, and went home to God victorious.

Father has now finished his course in sanctification and the fear of God. He fought the good fight and kept the faith, and the crown of righteousness is laid up for him. One of the last things he said to Mother was: “The righteous shall live by faith, and I’m going to do that until the very end.”

He said so often that it is vital to seek God’s honor in everything we do and say, and that’s the way he himself lived. My prayer is that God will help me to follow Father’s faith so that I, too, can be a star in his crown.

* * *

Johanne Sandvik (his daughter)

The day our beloved father died, I felt as if we had become poor — unspeakably poor. Father filled his place in the home to perfection. He was good and loving toward all of us. There was something secure, something good about Father. When we were sick, he laid his blessed hands on us and prayed for us, and we learned to put our trust in God. When my daughter Liv was critically ill two years ago, he came and anointed her and prayed for her. We left her in God’s hands, and she recovered. From our childhood, Father taught us to believe in God and to shun all worldliness and pride of life. And my longing is that I might walk in the steps of our fathers and lay hold of the inheritance I have received. We have already experienced how Father’s blessing follows us, and it will continue until our course is completed and we are all home together with God.

* * *

Trygve Sandvik, Horten (his son-in-law)

He swung the sword over all flesh, but at the same time he had a deep rest in God that was like a dead calm, night and day — for example, during the evacuation. “What we need is wisdom,” he said. Yes, the words of the wise are like goads in the heart.

* * *



	Each heart is now rejoicing in heavenly accord.

	The light that’s gained through suff’ring brings content from the Lord.

	Now Zion’s cloud of witnesses beckons unto me.

	With body and with soul I desire with Him to be.

	 	Chorus:

	Zion, thou place of peace —

	in thee God’s saints shall ever

	From all their sorrows cease.

	By faith I gain a glimpse of the place where Jesus dwells.

	My rev’rence is so deep when this thought within me wells.

	There, holiness is reigning and love does e’er abide;

	There, all life’s hidden myst’ries by Him are clarified.

	Here summer, rain and sunshine, each lovely autumn day,

	And winter with its gladness all quickly fade away.

	Here parents, children, loved ones, are torn apart by death;

	Each flower that you care for soon wilts as by a breath.

	This world and all its glory is but deceit, so vain.

	We see this, O so clearly; each day God makes it plain.

	We therefore gather treasure where no corruption is.

	God dwells not in the temp’ral; does it not realize this?

J. O. Smith





