Letter to the Hebrews





Johan O. Smith





License


	 		This e-Book is licensed to:



		Hans-Willem van der Waal

		jwh.vd.waal@filternet.nl

		Church: Rotterdam



		Downloaded from Brunstad Portal: 12/25/2015



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag





Colophon




	Letter to the Hebrews





	commentary by

	Johan O. Smith





	 		Translated from the Norwegian

		Original title: Hebreerbrevet

		First published in 1938



		English Edition: 1st edition 2001



		e-Book version: 2011 (revision: 24-9-2011)

		ISBN 978-82-8253-067-5 (ePub format)



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag

		P.O. Box 900

		3168 Melsomvik

		Norway



		www.ssfnett.no

		www.brunstad.org





		For this edition the New King James Version of the Bible has been used in the text. An occasional word or phrase from the Norwegian Bible translation of 1930 appears in brackets in place of (or in addition to) the New King James Version wording to more accurately reflect what the author wrote.





Copyright and terms of use




Copyright



	© This material is protected by the copyright law. Reproduction and/or making the material publicly available, is prohibited without the prior written consent of Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc., P.O. Box 2846, Winnipeg, MB Canada R3C 4B4, if not as the result of invariable established law. Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, P.B. 900, Brunstad, N-3168 Melsomvik, Norway [including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc.]

	(See www.ssfnett.no and www.brunstad.org)





Terms of use



	This e-Book is licensed only for personal use and can thus not be resold or given to other persons. 	If you want to share this book with others, you can refer them to portal.brunstad.org. 	If you read this e-Book and not have your own personalized copy, you should go to portal.brunstad.org and download your own copy.



	Thank you for respecting these terms of use.





Chapter 1


Verse 1. "God, who at various times and in different ways spoke in time past to the fathers by the prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by His Son . . . ."

Jesus says, "I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you." John 14:18. He comes to us by the Spirit of truth, the Advocate, the Holy Spirit, "whom the Father will send in My name, He will teach you all things, and bring to your remembrance all things that I said to you." John 14:26. In time past God spoke in many ways through signs and wonders, but now He speaks only through the Spirit of truth, who takes what He has heard from the Son and shares it with us.

Verse 2. "Whom He has appointed heir of all things, through whom also he made the worlds . . . ."

When such a mighty heir speaks, it surely pays to listen closely, because the intention is that you and I are to be fellow heirs, and the only way that can happen is by listening to Him who speaks from heaven. God created the world by His Son. It is obvious that He is not then going to give it away to someone else.

Verse 3. "Who being the brightness of His glory and the express image of His person, and upholding all things by the word of His power . . . ."

Everything is upheld by Him, just as all things were created for Him. He who has seen the Son and the way He walked here on earth has also seen the Father. The two are inseparably one. If we become one with the Father and the Son, then we too receive the brightness of His glory and we become the express image of His person. If we suffer with Him, we will also be glorified together with Him. This is a hope and a future.

"When he had by Himself purged our sins, sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high . . . ."

It was the power of the resurrection that brought Him up there. That He is sitting at the right hand of the Majesty means that God uses Him as an Advocate to carry out His will for mankind through the Holy Spirit. God speaks to us through the Son in all the situations that we meet in our daily life. He convicts the world of sin, of righteousness, and judgment. When our conscience becomes uneasy, then it is the Son who is speaking. There are things that need to be put right.

Verse 4. "Having become so much better than the angels, as He has by inheritance obtained a more excellent name than they."

The whole world knows the name of Jesus. Not so with the angels. Through Jesus' name, a poor sinner can receive forgiveness. Not so with angels. Through the name of Jesus a saved sinner can get victory over sin and grow up into Him who is the head of the church. He, who has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the church. A person who has an ear can get victory over sin. We see this when we read what the Spirit said to the seven churches in Asia Minor.

Verse 5. "For to which of the angles did He ever say: 'I will be to Him a Father, and He shall be to Me a Son'?"

The angels have never had a flesh and blood like we who are human, but the Son has. It was when Jesus was in flesh and blood that He was tempted. That was when he gave up His own will in order to do His Father's will. John 5:19, 30; John 6:38; John 7:18.

Which of the angels has ever been manifested in flesh? None of them. It is in the flesh that there is opposition to God's will. That is why God had to send His Son in flesh in order to conquer this will—the self-will. The will of God was revealed to mankind by the law, however it was impossible to carry out God's will through the law because of the weakness of the flesh. But now it is possible, because God has sent His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin, and He has condemned sin in the flesh. Rom. 8:3. This gives us power—who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit.

Start to walk in the Spirit against your own flesh, and then you will discover tremendous joy in the fact that Jesus was manifested in the flesh and that God condemned sin in the flesh. A much greater salvation than "sinning and then receiving grace for forgiveness" is now possible. We can now gain victory in the thought life before any sinful deeds occur.

Which of the angels has accomplished such a tremendous work? And to which of the angels has He said, "You are My Son"? The Son—while He was in the flesh—did the will of the Father, even unto bloodshed, even unto the death of the cross. None of the angels have been tested in this way.

Verse 6. "But when He again brings the firstborn into the world, He says: 'Let all the angels of God worship Him.'"

This verse makes the difference quite clear. We see the value of having been manifested in flesh. All the angels of God who have never been in the flesh worship Him.

So you who deny that Christ has come in the flesh, what will you say on that Day? Your ignorance in the matter won't help you. Perhaps the way all the angels of God worship the Son on that Day will convince you of your error and unbelief.

Verse 7. "And of the angels He says: 'Who makes His angels spirits and His ministers a flame of fire.'"

God uses His angels to help in outward things, either for protection in times of outward difficulties or to punish ungodliness. As for the inward ministry, God uses the Son, because angels do not know the new and living way through the veil, His flesh. They long to get a glimpse into this unsearchable wisdom of God. 1 Pet. 1:12.

Verse 8. "But to the Son He says: 'Your throne, O God, is forever and ever; a scepter of righteousness is the scepter of Your kingdom.'"

The Son has become worthy of the throne. He is one with the Father and throughout all eternity will have the right to use the scepter of righteousness. Why? Because when He was in flesh and blood, He was obedient unto death, even the death of the cross. Since He offered Himself in the power of an eternal Spirit and since He suffered death in the flesh, God made Him alive in the spirit. No power or principality can stand against His scepter of righteousness. It reaches into death according to the flesh and to the throne of the Majesty on high according to the spirit.

Verse 9. "You have loved righteousness and hated lawlessness; therefore God, Your God, has anointed You with the oil of gladness more than Your companions."

It is really amazing that He who loved righteousness and hated lawlessness always seemed to be colliding with the scribes and Pharisees. They were the most prominent religious leaders of their day, and they sat on the seat of Moses. Were these religious people so completely different from the Master that they loved iniquity and hated righteousness? Jesus spoke to no one more severely than He spoke to the religious elite. Time and time again He said: Woe to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites, blind guides, who cleanse the outside of the cup and dish, but inside are full of extortion and greed. You who are like whitewashed tombs which indeed appear beautiful outwardly, but inside are full of dead men's bones and all uncleanness. Matt. 23 and Luke 11.

As long as a person remains in darkness, the priesthood of our day will be sufficient for him; but as soon as that person goes from darkness into His marvelous light, hatred is awakened in the scribes and Pharisees. By their contact with a spiritual priesthood it is made plain to them that their priesthood is merely human. Envy and hatred rise up from the depths of the flesh, the same envy and hatred that crucified the Lord of glory, and which later persecuted all the saints, right down to Hans Nielsen Hauge. [1] Even in these days, they continue to work against the saints. It is these people who have always held the keys of knowledge. Even though they will not enter into the kingdom of heaven themselves, they hinder those who want to enter in. Jesus went to war against this formidable hindrance, and in the end the scribes and Pharisees put Him to death. They managed to get the secular authorities on their side, and so they pushed their will through. Now in our days, their spiritual kinsmen (the harlot) sit so insecurely in the saddle on the red beast and are so close to being thrown off that they dare not try anything against the saints of God. However, the desire is certainly there. The time will soon come when the red beast that hates the harlot will make her desolate and naked, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. For God has put into their hearts to fulfill His purpose, to be of one mind. Rev. 17:16-17. Then there will be joy in heaven. Rev. 19.

The servants of God's kingdom, who during their lifetime loved righteousness and hated lawlessness, have always had to battle against this obstacle.

"And I heard another voice from heaven saying, 'Come out of her, my people, lest you share in her sins, and lest you receive of her plagues.'" Rev. 18:4.

Our love for righteousness and hatred of lawlessness cause a division to take place in our lives, and make it possible for God's light and wisdom to enter in. Jesus worked with this all the days of His life. For Him, this love and hatred was a spiritual sword that pierced and separated to the dividing of soul and spirit and of joints and marrow, and discerned the thoughts and intents of the heart. Heb. 4:12. This brought God's good pleasure over Jesus, and that, to Him, was the oil of gladness. In this way the Son of Man entered into rest to a deeper degree than any of his brethren, and the oil of gladness followed Him.

Verses 10-12. "You, Lord, in the beginning laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the work of Your hands. They will perish, but You remain; and they will all grow old like a garment; like a cloak You will fold them up, and they will be changed. But You are the same, and Your years will not fail." When God completed His work of creation, He saw everything that He had made, and indeed it was very good. Gen. 1:31. But then the serpent came and led mankind astray. God said to Adam, "Because you have heeded the voice of your wife, and have eaten from the tree of which I commanded you, saying, 'You shall not eat of it': cursed is the ground for your sake . . . .'" Gen. 3:17.

From the very beginning the earth was established on God's righteousness. Everything was exceedingly good. But through the fall of man the curse came over the earth. The heavens are God's handiwork, but Satan, the old serpent, and his angels fell and were cast down to the earth. This is the reason for God having to create a new heaven and a new earth where righteousness dwells. The old heavens and earth shall grow old and perish. They will be folded up like a cloak.

Peter writes in his second letter, third chapter: "But the heavens and the earth which now exist are kept in store by the same word, preserved for fire until the day of judgment and perdition of ungodly men. But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night, in which the heavens will pass away with a great noise, and the elements will melt with fervent heat; both the earth and the works that are in it will be burned up." 2 Pet. 3:7, 10.

Jesus Christ, however, remains the same. He stood the test of fire in the days of His flesh, so God's fire cannot consume Him. He will live forever. Jesus said, "I came to send fire on the earth." Those who follow Him will also be tested by fire, and they will receive eternal life. These are freed from the earth and from among men by this fire. Rev. 14:3-4.

Verse 13. "But to which of he angels has He ever said: 'Sit at My right hand, till I make Your enemies Your footstool'?"

It appears as if the world is able to govern itself without God. People vote and elect and speak about politics just as if they knew everything there is to know. Nonetheless, God is behind everything and is leading the nations toward the feet of Christ. That will become evident on the day when God gives Gog a grave in Israel. Read Ezekiel chapters 38 and 39. Then God will gather the nations on the mountains of Israel and bring them to judgment with fire and brimstone and with a great earthquake, and the mountains will be thrown down and the steep places will fall. Every man's sword will be against his brother.

God will magnify Himself and sanctify Himself and will be known in the eyes of many nations. Then they shall know that He is the Lord.

In Revelation 19 it is written about the same event: "Then the beast [the nations] was captured, and with him the false prophet who worked signs in his presence, by which he deceived those who received the mark of the beast and those who worshiped his image. These two were cast alive into the lake of fire burning with brimstone. And the rest were killed with the sword which proceeded from the mouth of Him who sat on the horse. And all the birds were filled with their flesh." Verses 20-21.

"And all who dwell on the earth will worship him, whose names have not been written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world." Rev. 13:8.

God will gather all the Gentiles to war against Jerusalem, and thus He will fulfill His word: "Sit at My right hand till I make Your enemies Your footstool." On that day Christ's feet "will stand on the Mount of Olives which faces Jerusalem on the east. And the Mount of Olives shall be split in two, from east to west, making a very large valley; half of the mountain shall move toward the north and half of it toward the south." This is the sword of the Lord that separates and divides. Thus the Lord my God will come, and all the saints with You. It shall come to pass in that day that there will be no light; the lights will diminish . . . But at evening time it shall happen that it will be light . . . And the Lord shall be King over all the earth. In that day it shall be—'the Lord is one,' and His name is one." Zech. 14.

Verse 14. "Are they not all ministering spirits sent forth to minister for those who will inherit salvation?"

When Jacob blessed Joseph's sons, he said, "The angel who has redeemed me from all evil, bless the lads." Gen. 48:16.

Israel cried out to the Lord, and He heard their voice and set an angel to bring them out of Egypt. Num. 20:16.

"And it came to pass on a certain night that the angel of the Lord went out, and killed in the camp of the Assyrians one hundred and eighty-five thousand; and when people arose early in the morning, there were the corpses—all dead." 2 Kings 19:35.

"The angel of the Lord encamps all around those who fear Him, and delivers them." Ps. 34:7.

From these passages we understand something of the ministry of the angels on behalf of those who are to inherit salvation.





Chapter 2


Verse 1. Therefore we must give the more earnest heed to the things we have heard, lest we drift away."

If a ship's anchor isn't properly fixed to the bottom, the ship will begin to drift when gales and storms blow.

God's Word is like an anchor for the soul, both sure and steadfast and which enters behind the veil, where Jesus has entered for us. Heb. 6:19-20.

It is quite possible to drift away from what we have heard, and the result is always disastrous.

Adam was the first to drift away from what he had heard, and the consequences were dreadful. The whole earth came under the curse.

Saul drifted away from the word of the Lord. He was told to destroy Amalek and all that belonged to him. He was to kill man and woman, infant and nursing child, ox and sheep, camel and donkey. 1 Sam. 15:3. Yet Saul spared the king of the Amalekites and the best of the sheep, the oxen, the lambs and all that was good. Everything that was despised and worthless he utterly destroyed. Verse 9.

Amalek had ambushed Israel on the way up from Egypt. This was why Saul was commanded to punish him, but he drifted away from the word of the Lord.

How important it is for those who preach the Word to be faithful to the Word of the Lord, not like Saul who destroyed what was despised and worthless but spared what looked good and was highly esteemed.

Samuel received the word from the Lord regarding Saul: "For you have rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected you from being king over Israel."

Whatever God speaks stands for all eternity and leads to eternal salvation. To drift away from His Word is to drift into the arms of Satan. The end of that is judgment and perdition because God requires obedience.

Verses 2-4. "For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by those who heard Him, God also bearing witness both by signs and wonders, with various miracles, and gifts of the Holy Spirit, according to His own will?"

The Lord and two angels manifested themselves to Abraham and said: "I will certainly return to you according to the time of life, and behold, Sarah your wife shall have a son." Gen. 18:10. "And the Lord visited Sarah as He had said, and the Lord did for Sarah as He had spoken. For Sarah conceived and bore Abraham a son in his old age, at the set time of which God had spoken to him." Gen. 21:1-2. Sarah was well on in years, but God performed a miracle. What He had spoken by the Lord and the angels came to pass. What he had spoken regarding Sodom and Gomorrah also came to pass. He caused fire and brimstone to rain—from the Lord, from heaven—down on Sodom and Gomorrah. Gen. 19:24.

In exactly the same way, Jesus' words will also come to pass, and if we neglect so great a salvation, we will not be able to escape.

Verses 5-6. "For He has not put the world to come, of which we speak, in subjection to angels. But one testified in a certain place, saying: 'What is man that You are mindful of him, or the son of man that You take care of him?'"

David says in Psalm 8: "When I consider your heavens, the work of Your fingers, the moon and the stars, which You have ordained, what is man that You are mindful of him, and the son of man that you visit him? For You have made him a little lower than the angels, and You have crowned him with glory and honor. You have made him to have dominion over the works of Your hands; You have put all things under his feet, all sheep and oxen—even the beasts of the field, the birds of the air, and the fish of the sea that pass through the paths of the seas. O Lord, our Lord, how excellent is Your name in all the earth!"

Everything has been put into subjection under the Son of Man. If we suffer with Him, we will also be glorified together with Him, because we are members of His body. We are not only members of His earthly body and its sufferings, but also of His glorified body, provided we are faithful and endure. Col. 1:22-23.

The world to come will not be subject to angels. "But when He again brings the firstborn into the world, He says: 'Let all the angels of God worship Him.'" Heb. 1:6.

Verses 7-9. "You made him a little lower than the angels; You crowned him with glory and honor, and set him over the works of Your hands. You have put all things in subjection under his feet.' For in that He put all in subjection under him, He left nothing that is not put under him. But now we do not yet see all things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death crowned with glory and honor, that He, by the grace of God, might taste death for everyone."

Jesus was exalted above all men because He suffered death for all men. What did Jesus accomplish for all mankind? God's will was carried out in flesh and blood. Life and immortality. Victory over sin, death over al the powers of Satan, the power of the resurrection and exaltation over every principality and power and every name that is named, not only in this world but also in the one to come. Col. 1:15-20; Phil. 2:9-11; Eph. 1:19-23. And God placed Him over all this as head of the church.

Verse 10. "For it was fitting for Him, for whom are all things and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory, to make the author of their salvation perfect through sufferings."

God saw that nothing less would achieve the goal. If many children were to be led to glory by and through sufferings, then the leader of these many brethren, the captain of our salvation, had to be led the same way. All things were made through Him and for Him, and for this reason He had to enter the sufferings more deeply than anyone else in order to be crowned as the Lord of glory. He surpasses all comprehension. It was fitting for God to do it this way because Jesus had given up all claim to heavenly glory for our sakes.

Verse 11. "For both He who sanctifies and those who are being sanctified are all of one, for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren . . . ."

God has made it very simple, so that we may be able to lay hold of eternal life. He has given us His own Son, Jesus Christ, as a brother among brothers, and has made Him a second Adam, a life-giving Spirit. We are all of one and the same Father, whose love is given to us all and draws us all to Him. Jesus showed the Father to His disciples, and now as the Mediator, He is still doing the same. We are all at different levels, so the Mediator isn't just for one, but God is one. He reaches us all through the Mediator. He communicates with us all through the Son.

Verses 14-15. "Inasmuch then as the children have partaken of flesh and blood, He Himself likewise shared in the same, that through death He might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, and release those who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage."

If Jesus had not partaken of flesh and blood He could not have helped us who have. But He did share in flesh and blood, and through death He crushed Satan, who after the fall of man ruled through the flesh. Most people remain in death because they do not believe. Because of this, they are still ruled by the power of the devil. In these days there are many Christians who consider it blasphemous to believe that Jesus came in the same flesh and blood as we. They believe that He had flesh and blood like Adam before the fall of man. But what help would that be for us who are in need of salvation after the fall of man? Surely there weren't people before the fall of man who, through fear of death, were in bondage all their lifetime, and now need redemption through the appearing of Jesus in the flesh? Each revelation that is not divine leads people astray because no scripture is for private interpretation. True revelation came when holy men spoke, driven by the Holy Spirit. The manifestation of the Spirit is given to each one for the profit of all. When a person lives in manifest sin, he has no use for clarity about Christ manifested in the flesh. He gets along fine with "sin and grace." We hear about this constantly, but it never leads to a victorious life.

If a person is to overcome the law of sin and death through the law of the Spirit of life, he must have light over Christ manifested in the flesh—light over the fact that God condemned sin in Jesus' flesh, and that Jesus died to the flesh in order to free all those who were in bondage all their lifetime. Rom. 8:1-3.

Verse 16. "For indeed He does not give aid to angels, but He does give aid to the seed of Abraham."

Abraham lived hundreds of years after the fall of man. It was his seed that was to receive aid. Jesus did not take upon Himself the nature of an angel or of Adam before the fall of man. Abraham was a God-fearing man with a sinful flesh, and he waited for the deliverance that would come from the city whose builder and maker is God. People who have this mind—even though they have a sinful flesh—are in truth the seed of Abraham. These alone can receive revelation about the great mystery of godliness: "Christ manifested in the flesh." 1 Tim. 3:16. The fact that it is described as the mystery of godliness tells us clearly that this mystery is only revealed to God-fearing people. They have use for it. The study of theology is of no use here. People who have all kinds of theories about the New Testament remain in complete ignorance and are far away from understanding the mysteries of Christ, while uneducated people can easily understand the instruction of the Spirit. What is the reason for this??? Isn't it because the spiritual priesthood is so highly exalted above the earthly?

Verse 17. "Therefore in all things He had to be made like His brethren, that He might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make propitiation for the sins of the people."

It was here on earth, in flesh and blood, that Jesus received His education to be High Priest. It was while He was here that He had a self-will to conquer. John 6:38. It was on earth that He suffered death according to the flesh, in that He suffered when he was tempted. All this took place so that He can come to our aid when we are tempted. He Himself went before us through the flesh and therefore can give grace to help in time of need.

Verse 18. "For in that He Himself has suffered being tempted, He is able to aid those who are tempted."

Is this difficult to understand? No, it is quite simple. But it must be understood by faith, because unbelief understands nothing.

He Himself has suffered being tempted and is therefore a faithful High Priest, One who is able to sympathize with our weaknesses. A man who has never himself been tried in an area cannot help others when they are tried in that area. If Jesus had been like Adam before the fall of man, He would not have been tried like we are. But that is not what the Scriptures testify to: "Therefore in all things He had to be made like His brethren." It is the Word of God that we are to follow and not the fables of men. Faith is the full assurance of things which cannot be seen, and by faith we understand.

However, unbelief also has a type of understanding. In Jesus' day, the Pharisees and scribes became furious when He testified about Himself that He was "the Son of God." Today people react in the same way when we say that He was "the Son of Man." Yet faith knows the way, both then and now. And against that faith the masses always cry, "Crucify, crucify!" This is precisely where unbelief and faith go separate ways. And who was it that stirred up the crowd against Jesus while He was alive? Was it not the scribes and Pharisees? There is nothing new under the sun; the same thing happens today. The sins of the people provide a livelihood for the priests. But in 1 John 3:8 it is written: "He who sins is of the devil, for the devil has sinned from he beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil." The works of the devil are destroyed when we do what God's Word says: Take up your cross daily.





Chapter 3


Verses 1-2. "Therefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Christ Jesus, who was faithful to Him who appointed Him, as Moses also was faithful in all His house."

Consider Jesus, the Apostle. The work of an apostle is to bring light to those who sit in darkness. The Messiah had to suffer, and as the first to rise from the dead, He was to proclaim light to the Jewish people and to the Gentiles. Acts 26:23. After Jesus was tempted by Satan, and after He heard that John was thrown into prison, He went to live in Capernaum, which is by the sea in the regions of Zebulun and Naphtali.

From this time Jesus began His work as an apostle. He had been tempted by Satan but remained faithful. John had been thrown into prison so there was no support available from him. So Jesus stood there with His heavenly calling and with power and light in His inner man, against an entire world full of evil and darkness—without any support whatsoever in this world.

Consider Jesus in this situation—in truth an apostle's position. Isaiah prophesied: "The people who sat in darkness have seen a great light, and upon those who sat in the region and shadow of death light has dawned." Matt. 4:13-16.

Consider Jesus as High Priest. God declared Him to be High Priest according to the order of Melchizedek. Jesus' work as High Priest cannot begin until a person has died to the transgressions of the first covenant. Heb. 9:15. He is the Mediator for the new covenant. This covenant is written in heart and mind. The reason you hardly ever hear of Jesus being spoken about from the pulpit as High Priest is because people do not know Him as High Priest. They know Him only as an offering for sins. Jesus' work as High Priest enables us to be an offering for sin in Christ's earthly body. Col. 1:22. Just knowledge of "sin and grace" is not enough in the body of Christ. It must go deeper so that it includes the knowledge of the death of Christ in us. Then the ministry of a mediator comes into its own. "For we who live are always delivered to death for Jesus' sake, that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our mortal flesh." 2 Cor. 4:11.

This is written to people who have received a heavenly calling. Without having this calling it is impossible to confess and understand Jesus as Apostle and High Priest.

Jesus was faithful to Him who appointed Him. Through faithfulness we too get light over Jesus as High Priest. He was made High Priest in the days of His flesh because He was faithful to His heavenly Father in absolutely everything. The High Priest uses this faithfulness to teach us who are following the heavenly calling. We are instructed about right and wrong, truth and falsehood, even in the smallest details. We face decisions every moment. Here we must demonstrate divine faithfulness, if we are to be among the flock that follows the Lamb wherever He goes. Rev. 14:4. That we are following the Lamb means we are constantly being slaughtered like the Lamb. Our self-will must always be denied. God is always right, and we are always wrong. We need to acknowledge this continually. This is what it means to consider Jesus as High Priest, and how He became our High Priest.

Verses 3-6. "For this One has been counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as He who built the house has more honor than the house."

Moses was faithful in all God's house. The house became visible through the law. God became known by the name "Lord." The body received a form. Every sin that a person commits is outside the body. The law came because of transgressions, and all the offerings under the law were for the cleansing of the flesh. In this way the body received a form. God, who formerly was known as the great and almighty God, was now known by the name "Lord." The Rock that followed them was Christ. It was a great honor for Moses that he was found faithful in all his service in the house. But Christ made the house, and he who makes the house has greater honor than the house itself. This is the difference between Moses' honor and Christ's honor.

"For every house is built by someone, but He who built all things is God."

Moses unveiled the house that God had made before Moses was born. This house had become invisible because of transgressions and sin. But through the law and the sacrifices, the house, which is the body, became visible. Moses' glory was that he was faithful in this ministry.

"But Christ as Son over His own house, whose house we are if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm to the end."

All things are created through Christ and for Christ. The house was created long before Moses. But then the fall of man came and the house became invisible. By the ministry of Moses, the house became visible once again. However, Moses' ministry, with its various sacrifices, was only able to cleanse the outside of the house, not the inside. But when Christ came (the One who made the house), He went into the house and sin was condemned in the flesh. Rom. 8:3. He cleansed the inside of the house and did what was impossible for the law to do. He came into the house by partaking of flesh and blood just like the children. And once He had entered, He was able to bind the strong man (Satan) and throw him out together with all his schemes. Satan's will was crushed because while Jesus was in flesh and blood, He only did the will of His Father and not the will that is embedded in flesh and blood. By faith this is quite easy to understand. We are now His house. He dwells by faith in our hearts where we have sanctified Him as Lord. Satan and the flesh are no longer lords. On the contrary, we have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires, and this is how Satan is being crushed under our feet and his will is being crushed. Our Head is Christ, and He works in us to will and to do—directly against the will of the flesh and Satan. In this way, we are Christ's house, and we have a greater ministry than Moses who only preached an outward purity. We can, in the power of Christ by the Holy Spirit, proclaim an inward and an outward purity. We can sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb. Moses had the testimony of the water, but if we are faithful to Him who speaks from heaven, we have the testimony of the Spirit, the water, and the blood.

Verses 7-11. "Therefore, as the Holy Spirit says: 'Today, if you will hear His voice, do not harden your hearts as in the rebellion, in the day of trial in the wilderness . . . ."

God's voice leads us into a land that is flowing with milk and honey. Today if we hear His voice, we can go in by faith. We are not entering an earthly Canaan but a heavenly one. The spies came back and were able to tell of the Amalekites dwelling in the south, the Hittites, the Jebusites, and the Amorites dwelling in the mountains and the Canaanites dwelling by the sea and along the banks of the Jordan.

Against all these enemy nations the Lord had said: "Therefore understand today that the Lord your God is He who goes over before you as a consuming fire. He will destroy them and bring them down before you; so you shall drive them out and destroy them quickly, as the Lord has said to you." Deut. 9:1-4; Lev. 18:25.

But the people complained and wanted to stone Joshua and Caleb, because the other spies gave a bad report about the land to the children of Israel, saying: "We are not able to go up against the people, for they are stronger than we . . . all the people whom we saw in it are men of great stature. There we saw the giants (the descendants of Anak came from the giants); and we were like grasshoppers in our own sight, and so we were in their sight." Num. 13:31-34.

Every one of these enemies was cursed, so they could easily have been defeated, but Israel was full of unbelief and did not believe the Lord, even though they had seen His mighty works during their entire journey from Egypt.

Now it is our turn. "Today, if you will hear His voice!" Our land is also full of enemies: "Adultery, fornication, uncleanness, lewdness, idolatry, sorcery, hatred, contentions, jealousies, outbursts of wrath, selfish ambitions, dissensions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, revelries, and the like . . . ." Gal. 5:19-21.

All these enemies are cursed, and the Lord says: "Go up against them and destroy each one of them before the face of the Lord." But the people of our day also weep and say, "We cannot; our enemies are too strong." Then, spiritually speaking, they stone all those who by faith want to enter in. Nonetheless, God's oath remains unchanged: "Truly, they shall not enter My rest!"

Verses 12-13. "Beware, brethren, lest there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; but exhort one another daily, while it is called 'Today,' lest any of you be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin."

This is exactly the right expression: "An evil heart of unbelief." When dissensions, envy and idolatry have taken root in a person's heart and he is not willing to give them up, he has an evil and unbelieving heart.

God's Spirit leads us right against these enemies. When, in addition, a person weeps because he doesn't want to lose these abominations, then this word becomes true: "The sorrow of the world produces death." Blessed is everyone who hears God's voice and does not harden his heart. He enters into rest by faith.

Verse 14. "For we have become partakers of Christ if we hold the beginning of our confidence steadfast to the end . . . ."

Christ came in the flesh and took up the battle against the self-will that dwelt in the flesh. He overcame it in the power of an eternal Spirit—that Spirit which He had received from His heavenly Father from birth. Now we have received the same Spirit as Christ, and we overcome just as He overcame. In this way we share both in the sufferings and in the glory together with Him. But the condition is that we hold fast to the full assurance of faith until the end.

Verses 17-19. "Now with whom was He angry forty years? Was it not with those who sinned, whose corpses fell in the wilderness? And to whom did He swear that they would not enter His rest, but to those who did not obey? So we see that they could not enter in because of unbelief."

These things are written as examples for us. Through faith we enter into rest, but God has sworn that no one who is unbelieving shall enter into His rest.

Israel was saved from Egypt and from Pharaoh. These correspond to the power of Satan and the world. Nevertheless, God was not pleased with most of them because of their unbelief. Most Christians today are also wandering around in the wilderness without entering into the rest of faith. God is angry because of such unbelief. When the way has been opened through the veil (Jesus' flesh), it is tragic that so few walk on this blessed way. This makes God angry, which is quite understandable. He commands us to go into the land and conquer wrath, anger, malice, backbiting, covetousness, jealousy, adultery, division, etc., and yet people are overcome by most of these works of the flesh. That does not give them rest; on the contrary, it gives them a bad conscience and all kinds of unrest. Kill these enemies, and then you will have peace. Dash their little ones against the "Rock," and then you will get rest.





Chapter 4


Verses 7-10. "'Today, if you will hear His voice, do not harden your hearts.' For if Joshua had given them rest, then he would not afterward have spoken of another day. There remains therefore a rest for the people of God. For he who has entered His rest has himself also ceased from his works as God did from His."

Joshua was not able to lead the people into rest. They could have come to rest from all their outward enemies if they had done everything that God and Moses had commanded. Unbelief also overpowered them when they were in the land, so they could not keep that glorious land but were led captive to Babylon instead.

They could never come to rest from their inner enemies, the lusts in the flesh, through the help that Joshua and Moses could give. It was only the Son of Man, Jesus Christ who was manifested in flesh, who was able to drive out the enemies within so they could keep a pure heart and mind. This shows us the difference between the earthly Canaan and the spiritual. The spiritual Israel destroys every enemy that God's light exposes. All things are possible for those who believe. By faith it is possible to enter into that Sabbath rest which God has prepared for His people. In this Sabbath rest we can also rest from all our own works, just as God did from His. Our own human works cause us nothing but unrest and pain. Our own ways lead us astray. But when we come to rest from our own works, so that we are being prompted and led by the Spirit, we are led into the works which God has prepared beforehand that we should walk in them. Eph. 2:10. We are His workmanship, and the works in which we are to walk are also His work. God did not rest until all this was brought into order. If we enter into this glorious Sabbath rest of God by faith we can truly come to rest from all striving and turmoil according to the flesh. It is as if all our worries simply vanish.

Verses 11-13. "Let us therefore be diligent to enter that rest, lest anyone fall after the same example of disobedience. For the word of God is living and powerful, and sharper than any two-edged sword, piercing even to the division of soul and spirit, and of joints and marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart. And there is no creature hidden from His sight, but all things are naked and open to the eyes of Him to whom we must give account."

An exhortation to be diligent to enter into rest can sound as if we once more are to do our own works. However, that is not the case at all. We are to be diligent to enter into God's works. That means to be diligent to enter into rest, because God's word, the word to which we are to open our hearts, is living and powerful, two-edged and sharp. It pierces to the division of soul and spirit. The enemy that binds our soul and spirit together is killed by this sword, so that our spirit can be set free and made alive by the second Adam. "And so it is written, 'The first man Adam became a living soul.' The last Adam became a life-giving spirit." 1 Cor. 15:45.

"Or do you think that the Scripture says in vain 'He yearns zealously for the spirit that He made to dwell in us'? Therefore He gives more grace." Jas. 4:5-6.

God yearns jealously to reclaim that spirit (human spirit) that He caused to dwell in us. Therefore, He gives more grace. The sword of the Spirit judges the thoughts and intents of the heart. For this reason, we must always stand firmly on the side of Him who swings the sword so that we can be separated and divided according to the flesh and thus become perfect and entire, a new creation standing on resurrection ground.

No creature is hidden from His sight, and all things are naked and open to the eyes of Him to whom we must give account. He is the One who wields the sword. He knows how to find the sacrifices in our inner being, even the most hidden ones.

"Therefore, my beloved, as you have always obeyed, not as in my presence only, but now much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God who works in you both to will and to do for His good pleasure." Phil. 2:12-13.

From this we again see that we are to work out our salvation by presenting ourselves with fear and trembling to obey God's promptings, both to will and to do, and that we do not allow ourselves to drift back into doing our own dead and carnal works.

Verse 14. "Seeing then that we have a great High Priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession."

What does it mean to have a great High Priest who has gone through the heavens? The kingdom of heaven is within us. It consists of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. Rom. 14:17. When Jesus went through the heavens, it was because while He was down here He brought all the kingdom of heaven into the body, for all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden in it. All the fullness of the Godhead dwelt bodily in Him. Col. 2:3, 9. This is what it must mean to come through the heavens. Every nook and cranny in the whole body was filled with the fullness of God. In order to lead us to this same tremendous salvation, Jesus Christ has become our High Priest on the new and living way through the flesh. Let us therefore hold fast our confession of Jesus Christ as our High Priest, as Advocate, as the One who chooses the sacrifices from our inner life.

Verse 15. "For we do not have a High Priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin."

It is good that we have a High Priest who can understand us, One who was tempted in all points as we. He suffered being tempted. He always denied His own will and did God's will instead. God's will is our sanctification. Obviously, if He was tried in all things as we are and always did God's will and never His own, then it is clear that He never committed sin and that He had to suffer in the flesh.

It is this suffering that is called the suffering of Christ, and it is the fellowship with Christ in this suffering that the Scriptures call the fellowship of His sufferings. It is in this suffering that we are conformed to Christ in His death. However, this suffering and this death are little known among Christians, because they can only be understood through obedience to the Spirit and to the Word in battle and victory over the desires in the flesh. Here the knowledge of Christ manifested in the flesh is revealed. It is in truth a great mystery of godliness, and superficial Christians believe they are doing God and mankind a great service by trampling it underfoot. Nonetheless, they themselves will be trodden underfoot because of their unbelief. This "yet without sin" means without transgression. He stood the test without sinning.

Verse 16. "Let us therefore come boldly to the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need."

Here grace is in its right place—grace and help when it is needed to overcome sin. This is a grace that is meaningful. All this "sin and grace" only serves to strengthen a person in his sin so that he never stops sinning. That is why it is written, "'Their sins and their lawless deeds I will remember no more.' Now where there is a remission of these, there is no longer an offering for sin." Heb. 10:17-18.

The next verses show us the way: "Therefore brethren, having boldness to enter the Holiest in the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which He consecrated for us, through the veil, that is, His flesh, and having a High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water." Verses 19-22.

This is what it means to find help in time of need. "For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present age . . . ." Tit. 2:11-12.

Let him who stole steal no more. Let the proud and worldly-minded repent, in truth. A person who demonstrates such a repentance will certainly find grace; but if he continues to steal or to be vain and worldly-minded, he sins against the havihavhaving haHHH

grace and his religion is in vain. His conversion is false, and he cannot comfort himself by saying "sin and grace," because grace has not been used as help in time of need.





Chapter 5


Verses 1-3. "For every high priest taken from among men is appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. He can have compassion on those who are ignorant and going astray, since he himself is also subject to weakness. Because of this he is required as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins."

The service of all the priests reached its culmination in the service of the high priest. He himself was a human being who was appointed for people to minister to God. An angel could not carry out such a ministry. It had to be someone who was subject to weakness so that he could have compassion on the ignorant and wayward.

How wisely God arranges all things. He is compassionate and merciful toward all people. The way He ordered the priesthood testifies to that.

Verses 4-6. "And no man takes this honor to himself, but he who is called by God, just as Aaron was. So also Christ did not glorify Himself to become High Priest, but it was He who said to Him: 'You are My Son, today I have begotten You.' As He also says in another place: 'You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek' . . . ."

God said: "You are My Son." The angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream, while he and Mary were betrothed and before they had come together, and said, "Do not be afraid to take to you Mary your wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Spirit. And she will bring forth a Son, and you shall call His name Jesus, for He will save His people from their sins." Matt. 1:19-21.

From this it is quite clear that Jesus is the Son of God and the son of Mary. He is the Son of God and the Son of Man. According to the flesh, He came of the seed of David, and was declared to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead. Rom. 1:3-4.

Here we see Christ manifested in the flesh. In this flesh of the seed of David, He fought His priestly battle against the flesh by the Holy Spirit. He offered Himself in the power of an eternal Spirit, and suffered death in the flesh but was thus made alive in the spirit. When the time came that He was perfected, He could say: "It is finished." He had put off the flesh, which He gave for the life of the world, and had become a second Adam, a life-giving spirit, as opposed to the first Adam who became a living soul. Jesus also had this soul, but He poured it out. Once again we see the battle between flesh and spirit. Because His soul has labored, he shall see it (that the will of the Lord should prosper in His hand). This is the cause of all progress. If the will of the Lord does not prosper after a revival, then the people through whom the revival has taken place are nothing, and those who were revived are nothing. It is God's will that is our sanctification.

"You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek." Who then was this Melchizedek?

"And the king of Sodom went out to meet him at the Valley of Shaveh (that is, the King's Valley), after his return from the defeat of Chedorlaomer and the kings who were with him. Then Melchizedek king of Salem brought out bread and wine; he was the priest of God Most High. And he blessed him and said: 'Blessed be Abram of God Most High, Possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be God Most High, who has delivered your enemies into your hand.' And he gave him a tithe of all." Gen. 14:17-20.

After every spiritual victory, representatives from Satan's kingdom and from God's kingdom come and try to influence us. One is the king of Sodom. The other is Melchizedek, the priest of the Most High God. To whom shall we give the honor for the victory? The king of Sodom offered Abraham all the goods if only he could keep the people. Melchizedek blessed Abraham and strengthened him with bread and wine—an illustration of the flesh and blood of Christ. If Abraham had not had the mind of a shepherd but instead had been covetous he would have sold himself to the king of Sodom, accepted the goods and left the people with the king. Most probably the king of Sodom would later have used those same people to take the goods back from Abraham. But Abraham answered the king of Sodom: "I have raised my hand to the Lord, God Most High, the Possessor of heaven and earth, that I will take nothing, from a thread to a sandal strap, and that I will not take anything that is yours, lest you should say, 'I have made Abram rich.'"

Here we see Abraham's noble mind, a victorious mind. And here we see how Melchizedek ministers to a victorious soul. He strengthened Abraham with bread and wine. Jesus has overcome all principalities and powers. He is now sitting at the right hand of God as a faithful High Priest, and He always goes out to meet a victorious soul with bread and wine, with comfort and hope. Satan comes with honor (vain honor) and goods. How many preachers have allowed themselves to be fooled by rewards—the reward of the king of Sodom—and thus have sold the people for filthy lucre. By so doing they have rejected the blessing of Melchizedek together with his bread and wine. For this reason people do not know Jesus as the great High Priest according to the order of Melchizedek.

Verses 7-10. "Who, in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications, with vehement cries and tears to Him who was able to save Him from death, and was heard because of His godly fear, though He was a Son, yet He learned obedience by the things which He suffered. And having been perfected, He became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, called by God as High Priest 'according to the order of Melchizedek.'"

Jesus was saved from death because of His godly fear. What was the death from which He was saved? He had to die for our sins, and yet He was saved from death. He suffered death in the flesh, but was made alive in the spirit. It was a tremendous battle for Jesus to be saved from the death that is referred to here. Jesus partook of flesh and blood just like the children. As a consequence of this He also fought the same battle that the children fight—namely, against temptations of every kind. With vehement cries and tears He offered up prayers in the days of His flesh. The temptations in the flesh were many and strong. If Jesus, in this long drawn-out battle in the days of His flesh, had yielded even slightly to sin, Satan would have had a part in Him, and then He would have come under the power of death. It was this power of death that Jesus overcame, so He was heard because of His godly fear. We, on the other hand, have not overcome death. That is why it is written that we have passed from death to life.

Wherever Jesus Christ enters into a person's heart and is allowed to rule, then that person partakes of the same battle and sufferings. For this reason it is written: "And if Christ is in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness." Rom. 8:10. Jesus did not avoid physical death, but His spirit did not die. According to the spirit He was made alive. As such, He became the second Adam and a life-giving spirit. Jesus had to partake of flesh and blood, so that through death He might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, and release those who through fear of death were all their lifetime subject to bondage. This is the reason that we have now been set free from the power of death and have been delivered from death to life, from the power of Satan to God.

Jesus learned obedience by the things He suffered, and having been perfected, He became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey Him. It took time for Jesus to be perfected. It was during this time that He offered up prayers with vehement cries and tears. It wasn't only in the garden of Gethsemane that He prayed and suffered; it was throughout His whole life. It was in the course of these prayers, supplications and victories that He was perfected to be High Priest. It was under these circumstances that He became the author of eternal salvation for all those who obey Him. It was because He was faithful in all things unto death that God called Him High Priest according to the order of Melchizedek.

Verse 11. "Of whom we have much to say and hard to explain . . . ."

The life our High Priest lived on this earth conveys to us the life we, as His followers, are to live. Jesus was trained to become our High Priest by His contentment and obedience. If we are dull of hearing, we cannot understand the work our High Priest did on this earth. His tears, prayers and supplications are foreign to us. However, if we obey Him who speaks from heaven, a battle ensues between flesh and spirit; then the High Priest intercedes on our behalf with His help and understanding, because He Himself was tempted and suffered in the flesh. But to explain spiritually weighty things to people who are dull of hearing is a difficult matter even though there might be much to say about these things.

Verse 12. "For though by this time you ought to be teachers, you need someone to teach you again the first principles of the oracles of God; and you have come to need milk and not solid food."

By this time the Hebrews should have been teachers, but they had not been sufficiently attentive; they lacked godly fear.

The things that pertain to the mystery of godliness, that Christ was manifested in the flesh and justified in the spirit, were difficult for them to understand. They had had enough time to understand it, but their outward ear toward the world was more active than their inward ear toward God. That is why things went as they did. They could not bear strong meat but were still in need of milk. Christ as High Priest and the way in which God appointed Him High Priest were unclear for them. The reason was that the High Priest had gone through the veil—the flesh—and the Hebrews did not know enough about this new and living way, so not much could be said about it. It was too hard for them. They needed milk.

Verses 13-14. "For everyone who partakes only of milk is unskilled in the word of righteousness, for he is a babe. But solid food belongs to those who are of full age, that is, those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern between good and evil."

We must exercise our senses to discern between good and evil. If a person's love for God is great, he exercises himself in keeping God's commandments. God's laws are good, and everything that opposes His laws is evil. A little child can only receive milk, not solid food. It is a tragedy if they are still babes by the time they ought to be mature and able to bear solid food. Yet among Christians you can find virtually nothing but stunted babies who nonetheless are "mature" enough according to the flesh to speak evil of and warn people against God's way.

That is why there are so many Christians wandering endlessly in the wilderness without ever entering into the land, without entering into God's rest. Their life revolves around sin and grace all year long. If people were to take up their cross every day and follow Christ, there would be less sin and more of the grace that is not in vain. There would be more solid food and less milk. But who has the attitude of mind to follow the Lamb wherever He goes? Rev. 14:4.





Chapter 6


Verses 1-3. "Therefore, leaving the discussion of the elementary principles of Christ, let us go on to perfection, not laying again the foundation of repentance from dead works and of faith toward God, of the doctrine of baptisms, of laying on of hands, of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment. And this we will do if God permits."

By this time the Hebrews should have been grounded in the elementary principles of Christ. The foundation was laid in their lives, but they were not where they should have been spiritually. The apostle was not sure whether God would allow him to start from the beginning by laying again the foundation of the doctrines pertaining to these first principles.

It is amazing that it can take so long for a person to be able to distinguish between dead works and the works of faith. This is because a person is still a babe in Christ and has not matured enough to discern between good and evil, between the works of God and self-imposed works. As soon as anything is said about the obedience of faith, such a person sees it as bondage—dead works—something from which he must be delivered. Yet Paul was appointed as an apostle to the Gentiles precisely to bring about this obedience to the faith. Rom. 1:5. If a person's understanding is unclear regarding repentance from dead works and faith in God and deliverance from their own works in order to do the works of God, then the doctrine about baptism, the laying on of hands, resurrection from the dead and eternal judgment will also be unclear. The one depends on the other.

Verses 4-6. "For it is impossible for those who were once enlightened, and have tasted the heavenly gift, and have become partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come, if they fall away, to renew them again to repentance, since they crucify again for themselves the Son of God, and put Him to an open shame."

The apostle is saying that a person should take heed, for it is not so certain that God will permit the foundation to be laid again and again when that person is the cause of his own retarded growth. If he has tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come and then falls away and starts committing conscious sin, then the life of Christ which had grown up by faith in his inner man is crucified again. Thus Christ is put to an open shame.

Verses 7-8. "For the earth which drinks in the rain which often comes upon it, and bears herbs useful for those by whom it is cultivated, receives blessing from God; but if it bears thorns and briers, it is useless and near to being cursed, whose end is to be burned."

This is also how it goes with people. God gives abundant grace so that we may bear good fruit worthy of repentance. But if we continue to bear evil fruit we are useless and come under the curse; we will be consumed by the second death—the lake of fire. Only those who overcome shall not be hurt by the second death. Rev. 2:11.

Verse 9. "But, beloved, we are confident of better things concerning you, yes, things that accompany salvation, though we speak in this manner."

The apostle explained the development of this disobedience and inattentiveness, so that the Hebrews could see where it would lead them. However, he comforts them by saying, "But . . . we are confident of better things concerning you, yes, things that accompany salvation." In other words, "It isn't like that with you. Yes, you certainly are babes and you should have progressed further; nevertheless, you are not in as bad a condition as what we were describing earlier."

Verse 10. "For God is not unjust to forget your work and labor of love which you have shown toward His name, in that you have ministered to the saints, and do minister."

We see here that our works in Christ are of the utmost significance. The Hebrews had served the saints, and a just God would surely reward that. Just as the members of a body serve one another, so are we to serve the saints who are in the same body. This is a proof of unity and fellowship in the Spirit. Throughout all eternity, we will receive benefits and blessings for having served the saints, because our service has contributed to their upward development to the Head of the same body.

Verses 11-12. "And we desire that each one of you show the same diligence to the full assurance of hope until the end, that you do not become sluggish, but imitate those who through faith and patience inherit the promises."

We will not make any progress without diligence and zeal, whether it be in earthly or spiritual matters. The more we give ourselves to something, the more interesting it becomes for us. Our knowledge and wisdom increases and we amass more and more treasures in heaven. Where our treasure is, there will our heart be also. Sluggishness is self-destructive. All the saints of old were persistent and zealous right to the end. Neither lions' dens, nor the murmurings of the people, nor fire succeeded in weakening their full assurance of hope. Just think of Antiochus who tried to force seven brothers and their mother to eat pork, contrary to the law of Moses. All seven brothers were tortured to death because of their faith. Their mother encouraged each one of them in their hope and their faith so that she could receive them again in the resurrection of the dead. Last of all, the mother died. 2 Macc. 7. [2]

By enduring in faith and patience, we too die to wrath, passion, empty talk, backbiting, complaining, doubt, unchastity, unrighteousness, and blasphemy of all kinds, etc. Life becomes victorious and triumphant. All this takes place through the cross, and by death over the flesh with its passions and desires.

Verses 13-15. "For when God made a promise to Abraham, because He could swear by no one greater, He swore by Himself, saying, 'Surely blessing I will bless you, and multiplying I will multiply you.' And so, after he had patiently endured, he obtained the promise."

It is not without reason that God promised to bless Abraham. We read that this was directly related to the fact that Abraham had been obedient to the Lord and offered his only son, Isaac, who was so dear to him.

"Then the Angel of the Lord called to Abraham a second time out of heaven, and said: 'By Myself have I sworn, says the Lord, because you have done this thing, and have not withheld your son, your only son—blessing I will bless you, and multiplying I will multiply your descendants as the stars of the heaven and as the sand which is on the seashore; and your descendants shall possess the gate of their enemies. In your seed all the nations of the earth shall be blessed, because you have obeyed My voice.'" Gen. 22:15-18.

There was faith, there were promises, and there was faithfulness. As numerous as Israel was and still is, they were all, nonetheless, in the loins of Isaac when Abraham offered his son. By Abraham's faith, the whole of Israel was sacrificed in Isaac. That is why they are the people of God. Yet most of them have been and continue to be unbelieving.

"But it is not that the word of God has taken no effect. For they are not all Israel who are of Israel, nor are they all children because they are the seed of Abraham; but: 'In Isaac your seed shall be called.' That is, those who are the children of the flesh, these are not the children of God; but the children of the promise are counted as the seed." Rom. 9:6-8.

Jesus said to the Jews who resisted Him, "I know that you are Abraham's descendants, but you seek to kill Me, because My word has no place in you. I speak what I have seen with My Father, and you do what you have seen with your father.' They answered and said to Him, 'Abraham is our father.' Jesus said to them, 'If you were Abraham's children, you would do the works of Abraham. But now you seek to kill Me, a Man who has told you the truth which I heard from God. Abraham did not do this.'" John 8:37-40.

Abraham received the promise by the word of faith. But the Jews who did not believe were cut off because of their unbelief. They sought the law of righteousness by works and not by faith, so they did not attain to this law but stumbled over the stumbling stone. So then, it is those who believe that are Abraham's children, and they are partakers of the promises.

Verse 16. "For men indeed swear by the greater, and an oath for confirmation is for them an end of all dispute."

In the old covenant, an oath was to settle matters which could not be settled any other way. For example, "If a man delivers to his neighbor a donkey, an ox, a sheep, or any animal to keep, and it dies, is hurt, or driven away, no one seeing it, then an oath of the Lord shall be between them both, that he has not put his hands into his neighbor's goods; and the owner of it shall accept that, and he shall not make it good." Ex. 22:10-11.

However, in the New Testament it is written, "But I [Jesus] say to you, do not swear at all." James says, "But above all, my brethren, do not swear, either by heaven or by earth or with any other oath. But let your 'Yes' be 'Yes,' and your 'No,' 'No,' lest you fall into judgment." Jas. 5:12.

God had sworn: "You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek." All other oaths cease with this oath. The Son of God speaks to us from heaven, night and day, through the Spirit of truth. In this Spirit, our "Yes" is "Yes" and our "No" is "No," and then all oaths are abolished; they are superseded by the truth. As James says, if a person does not speak the truth, he falls into judgment.

Verses 17-18. "Thus God, determining to show more abundantly to the heirs of promise the immutability of His counsel, confirmed it by an oath, that by two immutable things, in which it is impossible for God to lie, we might have strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold of the hope set before us."

When it is written that God intervened with an oath, it means that He intervened between the old covenant and the new. The oath was the one immutable thing, and the prophecies of the Old Testament were the other. In Psalm 110:4 it is written, "The Lord has sworn and will not relent, 'You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.'" David and the prophets prophesied about the Messiah, and that the will of the Lord was to prosper by His hand. Yet the scribes of Jesus' time were not able to recognize Him as the Messiah. That was the natural consequence of them admiring the great men in this world. They could not imagine that the Messiah would come from a poor family. In other words, they were sacrificing to idols in the high places, which makes a person blind. The scribes of our day also admire those who are great in this world. They eat and they drink together with them, and hold fawning speeches for them. They themselves are unbelieving since and they are yoked together with unbelievers. The consequence is that they are completely blind to Christ manifested in the flesh—exactly as their predecessors were 1,900 years ago.

That is why it is written, "Thus God, determining to show more abundantly to the heirs of promise the immutability of His counsel . . . ." He does not show that to unbelieving people; whether they are learned or unlearned is of no consequence to God. God reveals His mysteries to the heirs of promise. The scribes, for all their studying, can never see anything but the shell. They can never comprehend the essence of the matter, for that requires godliness. And if any one of them were to receive revelation from the Spirit by virtue of his godliness, he would be excluded from the company of the scribes who have all their knowledge in their heads and not in their hearts.

Verses 19-20. "This hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which enters the Presence behind the veil, where the forerunner has entered for us, even Jesus, having become High Priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek."

The anchor of hope lies within the Most Holy Place. Jesus made a way for us into the Holiest through the veil, that is, His flesh. Heb. 10:19-20. He Himself entered in. That is why it is written: "Christ in you, the hope of glory." Unlike a ship's anchor, this anchor will never lose its hold. Christ, the anchor of our hope, is firmly secure in the Holiest because of God's oath.

God Himself has written in our hearts and minds the laws by which we can come to where He is. He takes away the legalistic sacrifices and establishes the second, that is, God's will. Heb. 10:9, 16. God's will is our sanctification. No other "will" is of any avail—and God's will is written in our hearts and minds. The Advocate from heaven reveals it, and the scriptures bear witness to it. In the depths of the heart, room is made for God's kingdom, and there the Father and the Son reveal themselves to all those who keep the commandments. John 14:21, 23.





Chapter 7


Verses 1-2. "For this Melchizedek, king of Salem, priest of the Most High God, who met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the kings and blessed him, to whom also Abraham gave a tenth part of all, first being translated 'king of righteousness,' and then also king of Salem, meaning 'king of peace' . . . ."

The first translation of the name Melchizedek is king of righteousness. He is made like the Son of God. He is king in doing righteousness in both big and small things. In him there is not even the slightest carelessness concerning righteousness. In his mind, he did not give any advantage to the flesh. He chose rather to suffer loss himself. That is why he is called "The King of Righteousness." To what extent are we following him in this area? This was how he obtained the standing of a king both in the flesh and in the Spirit. If we want to be kings and priests forever, then we must follow him in righteousness. A little unrighteousness ruins our royal dignity and impairs our priestly service. Let us remember this in our daily life when we have to make decisions in various matters.

Secondly, he is called the king of Salem, that is "The King of Peace." First righteousness, then peace. In this world, people strive for peace but they forget about righteousness. A consequence of this is a lack of peace; neither can we find the law of righteousness by means of legalistic works because it can only be found by faith in Jesus Christ. There is no other way. He is the center of all righteousness and peace. Without Him, we cannot receive either of these.

Verse 3. "Without father, without mother, without genealogy, having neither beginning of days nor end of life, but made like the Son of God, [he] remains a priest continually."

All we read about Melchizedek is that he met Abraham when he was returning from the slaughter of the kings, that he blessed Abraham, and that he was the king of Salem. Nothing is said about when he was born or when he left this life. Therefore it is written that he had no beginning of days nor end of life, and that he was made like the Son of God. Neither is there anything said of his father or his mother or his genealogy. Here also he is like the Son of God.

If, during all the days of our exile, we remain faithful to Him who was crucified, then we will be His true wife throughout all eternity. This is the City that descends from heaven in whose light all the nations of he earth shall walk. Rev. 21:10, 24.

Verses 4-7. "Now consider how great this man was, to whom even the patriarch Abraham gave a tenth of the spoils. And indeed those who are of the sons of Levi, who receive the priesthood, have a commandment to receive tithes from the people according to the law, that is, from their brethren, though they have come from the loins of Abraham; but he whose genealogy is not derived from them received tithes from Abraham and blessed him who had the promises. Now beyond all contradiction the lesser is blessed by the greater."

To get an accurate understanding of how great Christ is, Melchizedek, who is His forerunner, must be made great. The patriarch Abraham gave him a tenth of the spoils and received his blessings, though he himself had received the promises. But it is obvious hat the promises referred to the person Christ, and so, since Melchizedek was made like the Son of God, the Son is greater than he who received the promises about Him. In other words, Abraham, though he was a prophet and a prince, was subordinate to Melchizedek.

Jesus had to forsake His Father and His mother to be joined to His wife. He is not with His wife as the first Adam was with Eve. No, Jesus became a life-giving spirit and He poured out His soul. Isa. 53:12. The first Adam was a living soul. Gen. 2:7. Jesus also had a soul, but He poured it out. In this way, family ties according to the flesh were broken, so that He could say, "Woman, behold your son!" He did not call her "Mother." If He had done that from His heart, then He would not have been free from her. This is what it means to lose one's life when it comes to earthly family bonds. Jesus had to do this to win His bride, she who is redeemed from the earth and from among men, being firstfruits to God and to the Lamb. Rev. 14:3-4.

Furthermore it is written that the Father forsook Him at the moment of death. The Father had followed His beloved Son all through life, but now, when He was to lose His life, the Father had to forsake Him. The grace of the Father had to depart for a moment, so that the Son could be a perfect sacrifice. And not only that, but also that he could be given wholly and completely to His bride. Again we have to say with Paul, "This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and the church." The two shall be one flesh. Jesus brought His flesh into death. The bride must go the same way, and that is why it is written, "And those who are Christ's have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires." This is the reconciliation in the body of His flesh through death. Col. 1:21-22.

Melchizedek's lineage was not from Levi, who had the right to receive tithes from his brethren according to the law. Yet Levi gave a tithe through his father Abraham, for Levi was still in the loins of Abraham when Abraham gave Melchizedek tithes. In other words, he who had the right to receive tithes, paid tithes, and he paid them to a person who was not of his lineage. Levi was blessed by Melchizedek in the same way as Abraham, and thus Melchizedek blessed the whole priesthood of Israel, for Levi was yet in the loins of Abraham when Melchizedek blessed Abraham. This is how great this man was. For it is always the lesser who is blessed by the greater.

Verse 8. "Here mortal men receive tithes, but there he receives them, of whom it is witnessed that he lives."

How much is said in these few words! Here it is mortal men who receive tithes, not only in the old covenant but also in the new. One mortal man receives tithes from another mortal man. But there is One who has the testimony that He lives. Not only that, but He also has the testimony that He died.

A man will give everything that he has for his life. When Jesus died He gave everything that He possessed; they even cast lots for His garments. That was considerably more than ten percent. It is also the same with us who are always being delivered to the death of Christ. We always lose our life, and with it all that we possess. That is much more than a tenth, but we receive as an eternal possession Him "of whom it is witnessed that he lives."

With Him we receive the inheritance itself. What an excellent exchange! We receive the Son. How pathetic it is, then, to continue with tithing, and how much a person loses out in that way. Only people who are earthly continue with such things, in unbelief. Their vision of Him, of whom it is witnessed that He lives, is lacking in understanding and confidence, for it is He who said, "Seek first the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these things shall be added to you." He still has the testimony that He lives and that He is able to accomplish what He promised. It is the word of faith that we preach.

Verses 9-11. "Even Levi, who receives tithes, paid tithes through Abraham, so to speak, for he was still in the loins of his father when Melchizedek met him. Therefore, if perfection were through the Levitical priesthood (for under it the people received the law), what further need was there that another priest should arise according to the order of Melchizedek, and not be called according to the order of Aaron?"

The Levitical priesthood was not the perfect or final priesthood, because Levi—who had the right to receive tithes—paid tithes through Abraham. The people longed for a priest to arise according to the order of Melchizedek, not one who was descended from Aaron. The most God-fearing people in Israel understood this, even though they lived in the dispensation of the old covenant. Despite their precise and diligent observance of the law and all their sacrifices, they could not be perfect according to their conscience. Animal sacrifices were of no avail, for the sin dwelt in human bodies, not in the bodies of animals. Therefore, because the children have partaken of flesh and blood, Jesus likewise had to share in the same. "A body You have prepared for Me." In this body, sin was condemned. Rom. 8:3. This is the perfect priesthood.

Verses 12-14. "For the priesthood being changed, of necessity there is also a change of the law. For He of whom these things are spoken belongs to another tribe, from which no man has officiated at the altar. For it is evident that our Lord arose from Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood."

Moses required the sacrifice of animals with their ashes for the purifying of the flesh. Christ offered Himself in the power of an eternal Spirit. "A body You have prepared for Me." This body was sacrificed according to the will of God. The law of Moses could provide an outward cleansing, the forgiveness of sins. The law of the Spirit of Christ cleanses the inner life. Remember that it is called the law of the Spirit. The laws are contained in the Spirit, who writes them in our hearts and minds. As followers of Christ, we become filled with the laws of the Spirit of Christ. These are the laws of wisdom, for Christ is the wisdom of God. The priesthood has changed, and the law has changed from being the law of a carnal commandment to being the law of the Spirit of life.

Verses 18-19. "For on the one hand there is an annulling of the former commandment because of its weakness and unprofitableness, for the law made nothing perfect; on the other hand, there is the bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw near to God."

In the dispensation of the old covenant, sin had not been condemned in the flesh. Christ had not yet come in the flesh and put sin in the flesh to death. The work was not yet completed. That is why the flesh was so powerful that it made the law weak and unprofitable, even though in itself, the law was holy, just, and good. Sin in the flesh was so overwhelmingly mighty and powerful, that even though they had received the law by the direction of angels, they were not ale to keep it.

However, now a better hope is brought in so that we can draw near to God. The same spiritual power by which Jesus offered Himself now comes over us, and then it succeeds for us. This spiritual power is neither weak nor unprofitable; for in this power we can, by faith, crucify the flesh with its passions and desires. By walking in this power of the Spirit, the righteousness of the law will be fulfilled in us, and so a better hope can be brought in by which we can draw near to God.

Verses 21-22. "(For they have become priests without an oath, but He with an oath by Him who said to Him: 'The Lord has sworn and will not relent, "You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek"'), by so much more Jesus has become a surety of a better covenant."

God could not possibly swear that His will would be fulfilled through the old covenant, or by the priesthood of Aaron; for the ministry of the old covenant only cleansed to the purifying of the flesh, that is, to an external purity. All sin in the flesh remained just as firmly ingrained and expressed itself every now and then, even in the lives of the best of the people. But God swore that it would succeed through Christ. He came with a body to do God's will. "For what the law could not do in that it was weak through the flesh, God did by sending His own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, on account of sin: He condemned sin in the flesh . . . ." Rom. 8:3. Sin in the flesh was condemned; it was never able to prevail or rule. It was thus condemned and put to death on the cross in and by the body of Christ. Sin was put to death on the cross by Christ's obedience unto death. The prince of this world was never able to have any part in Him. That is the reason that God was able to swear that Jesus would be High Priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.

Christ has now become a surety of a better covenant, a new covenant for us, so that we who are His followers can also succeed in doing God's will just as Jesus did. His ministry as High Priest for us and the help that He imparts will work so powerfully in us that we will receive power to do God's will and to live a victorious life. Our heavenly High Priest is a surety for this, as long as we desire it as much as he does.

Verse 24. "But He, because He continues forever, has an unchangeable priesthood."

Our heavenly High Priest continues His ministry from one generation to another. His priesthood is eternal. In the areas where we have not attained unto perfection in Him, He has already been perfected, and can give us grace and power to help in time of need. For grace reigns through righteousness unto righteousness for everyone who avails himself of it for eternal life.

Verse 25. "Therefore He is also able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through Him, since He always lives to make intercession for them."

In other words, this is a personal matter for each individual. God does not want servants who have to be forced. Everything takes place according to the perfect law of liberty.

Verse 28. "For the law appoints as high priest men who have weakness, but the word of the oath, which came after the law, appoints the Son who has been perfected forever."

He was perfected by taking away sin through the one sacrifice, so that we too, by His victory over sin, will be able to triumph over it. This then becomes a victorious life for us as well, so when we are tempted, we say "no" to sin. We receive grace and power for this through the word of the oath.





Chapter 8


Verses 1-2. "Now this is the main point of the things we are saying: We have such a High Priest, who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, a Minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord erected, and not man."

When we consider that God is an unapproachable light, we understand that it is no small thing to come directly to the throne of the Majesty and to sit down at His right hand. The Son had endured the light, and walked in the light; indeed, He is the Light itself. He is given a priestly ministry in the sanctuary. This ministry is for our benefit. We must be found in the sanctuary, for it is there that the High Priest ministers. It is there that He chooses the things in us to be sacrificed. He deals with our self-will in a priestly way, and brings it to naught, and he plants God's will in its place. It is God's will that is our sanctification. The Advocate teaches us about God's way through the veil, which is His flesh. This is the true tabernacle.

Our heavenly High Priest is seated at the right hand of the Majesty, waiting until God has placed all Christ's enemies as a footstool for His feet.

That means that all the political movements of this world are in the process of being placed under the feet of Christ. He is the King who was chosen by God to rule over both Jews and Gentiles. That is why the angel Gabriel said to Mary: "And behold, you will conceive in your womb and bring forth a Son, and shall call His name JESUS. He will be great, and will be called the Son of the Highest; and the Lord will give Him the throne of His father David. And He will reign over the house of Jacob forever, and of His kingdom there will be no end." Luke 1:31:33.

Here we see Jesus Christ on the throne of David and seated as King over the house of Jacob. But God goes further in Psalm 2 and says, "Why do the nations rage, and the people plot a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord and against His Anointed, saying . . . He who sits in the heavens shall laugh; the Lord shall hold them in derision. Then He shall speak to them in His wrath, and distress them in His deep displeasure: 'Yet I have set My King on My holy hill of Zion. I will declare the decree: the Lord has said to Me, "You are My Son, today I have begotten You. Ask of Me and I will give You the nations for Your inheritance, and the ends of the earth for Your possession . . . .'" Now therefore, be wise, O kings; be instructed, you judges of the earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling. Kiss the Son, lest He be angry, and you perish in the way, when His wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all those who put their trust in Him."

From this we see that from eternity, the Son, Jesus Christ, was chosen to be the King of the whole earth. All His enemies shall be brought as a footstool for His feet.

Verse 3. "For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. There fore it is necessary that this One also have something to offer."

"Sacrifice and offering You did not desire; My ears You have opened. Burnt offering and sin offering You did not require. Then I said, 'Behold I come; in the scroll of the book it is written of me. I delight to do Your will, O my God, and Your law is within my heart.'" Ps. 40:6-8.

God had opened Jesus' ear. He heard God's voice and was obedient to it. Thus animal sacrifices and meat offerings became superfluous, for these were offered because sin had been committed.

"Sacrifice and offering You did not desire, but a body You have prepared for Me." Jesus presented His body as a well-pleasing sacrifice to God, and we are exhorted to do the same. Rom. 12:1. To do this, God must open our ears, just as our heavenly High Priest, so that we can hear Him who speaks from heaven.

The sacrifices were in Jesus' earthly body. That is why we too are reconciled in His earthly body through death, so that we can be holy and blameless, and above reproach in His sight. Col. 1:22.

This is how sin is condemned and put to death, so that we can live a victorious life. It is only this victorious life that possesses all the promises. Read in Revelation chapters 2 and 3 about having an ear to hear and about being victorious.

"The scepter shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh comes; and to Him shall be the obedience of the people." Gen. 49:10.

He takes away the first—animal sacrifices and meat offerings—which the priests of the old covenant offered, and He establishes the second—God's will. Heb. 10:8-9.

Verse 4. "For if He were on earth, He would not be a priest, since there are priests who offer the gifts according to the law . . . ."

Although Jesus was on earth with His body after the days of John the Baptist, His mind and His thoughts were not on the earth. He was in the kingdom of heaven! For the kingdom of heaven has been preached since the days of John the Baptist, and wherever this kingdom is proclaimed, the body becomes a sacrifice. Even though He was here on earth with His body, He was still not on the earth. He was not an earthly priest, for He offered Himself in the power of an eternal Spirit. He did not offer sacrifices and meat offerings like the Levitical priests.

In our days, too, there are many priests on the earth. They are neither Levitical priests nor priests of God. Had they been Levitical priests, they would have offered animal sacrifices; and if they had been heavenly priests, they would have presented their bodies as acceptable sacrifices to God.

A school or university cannot make anyone a priest according to the will of God. When a person's mind is bound to the earth, he is on the earth, even if he is a Doctor of Theology. Everyone should be able to understand this. Such a person is unlearned—he is a layman—when it comes to the Word of God. If he is not living the life himself, then his understanding about being a sacrificial priest on the new and living way is insufficient. To be a priest for people who live in darkness is easy, but to be a priest for God requires one's life as a sacrifice.

Verses 6-7. "But now He has obtained a more excellent ministry, inasmuch as He is also Mediator of a better covenant, which was established on better promises. For if that first covenant had been faultless, then no place would have been sought for a second."

The old covenant was given because of the transgressions. It cleansed the body externally, for every sin that a man commits is outside the body. 1 Cor. 6:18. But they did not continue in the covenant that the Lord had made with them. Heb. 8:9.

Verse 10. But now after the death of Christ and His resurrection the Lord says: "'For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel after those days,' says the Lord: 'I will put My laws in their mind and write them on their hearts; and I will be their God, and they shall be My people.'"

These laws, which are written in our heart and mind, come from the Holy Spirit who was poured out on all flesh after the resurrection of Christ. Acts 2:17. He convicts the world of sin because they do not believe. If we follow the Spirit's leading, He will guide us into all the truth. He will show us everything in our inner being that has to be sacrificed. He will give us grace and power to be conformed to Christ in His death and in His resurrection. Christ has become the Mediator for this. This is the ministry of the better covenant.

Verse 11. "None of them shall teach his neighbor, and none his brother, saying, 'Know the Lord,' for all shall know Me, from the least of them to the greatest of them."

It is very common today that people want someone to teach them about virtually everything, despite the fact that God said that is not necessary. This is because they lack an opened ear. He who has an ear hears what the Spirit is saying to the churches. To rectify this inability to hear, God has placed in the church apostles, prophets, evangelists, shepherds, and teachers. But we have to say with Moses: "Oh, that all the Lord's people were prophets." Exercise your ability to hear, and you will see that it will go well with you. The law of the Spirit will set you free from the law of sin and death, and the requirements of the law will be fulfilled in you.





Chapter 9


Verse 1. "Then indeed, even the first covenant had ordinances of divine service and the earthly sanctuary covenant."

When Israel followed these ordinances and lived in the fear of God, it went well, both with the priests and with the people; but if they broke the laws, it went worse with them than it would have if they had been as the Gentiles without the law.

Verses 2-3. "For a tabernacle was prepared: the first part, in which was the lampstand, the table and the showbread, which is called the sanctuary; and behind the second veil, the part of the tabernacle which is called the Holiest of All."

The earthly sanctuary was a pattern of the heavenly. For God had said to Moses, "See to it that you make them according to the pattern which was shown you on the mountain." Ex. 25:40.

"Then the Lord spoke to Moses, saying: 'Speak to the children of Israel, that they bring Me an offering. From everyone who gives it willingly with his heart you shall take My offering.'" Ex. 25:1-2.

The sanctuary was built by free-will offerings according to how each man's heart moved him. This is a picture of the heavenly sanctuary, which is built up according to the perfect law of liberty. Jas. 1:22-25. Each person builds according to the attitude of his heart. Jesus has gone ahead with a perfect attitude of mind, and now we are exhorted to have the same mind that was in Him. Phil. 2:5; 3:15. In this way, the whole building, being fitted together, grows into a holy temple in the Lord, in whom you also are being built together for a dwelling place of God in the Spirit. Eph. 2:21-22. God has made known to us the mystery of His will, according to His good pleasure which He purposed in Himself, that in the dispensation of the fullness of the times He might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are in the earth. Eph. 1:9-10.

If we want to have an inheritance and a part in the heavenly sanctuary, then we must do as the Lord commanded Moses: "And this is the offering which you shall take from them: gold, silver, and bronze; blue, purple, and scarlet thread, fine linen, and goats' hair; ram skins dyed red, badger skins, and acacia wood; oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil and for the sweet incense; onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod and in the breastplate. And let them make Me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them. According to all that I show you, that is, the pattern of the tabernacle and the pattern of all its furnishings, just so you shall make it." Ex. 25:3-9.

Now we have come face to face with reality. Everything in the new covenant is to be built up according to the promptings and the will of God, first individually (personally) and then collectively (together with the others).

There are abundant opportunities to offer the most precious things one possesses: gold, silver and bronze; then wool, linen, ram skins, badger skins, oil, spices, precious stones, etc. The spirit of stinginess is driven out of the Lord's building by force, and instead the spirit of sacrifice permeates everything.

Every person who has a heart for it can now offer his life, and thus everything that he possesses. In return, he will receive an inheritance in the heavenly sanctuary, which God, not man, has raised up. Eph. 1:11. Without this, you will not receive any inheritance at all.

Behind the Second Veil. Who enters in there? Our heavenly High Priest, Jesus Christ, has entered in. He has become a minister of the sanctuary for us. Have we followed Him in there or do we still stand outside gazing at the veil? Perhaps this is why God's Word is neither believed, nor understood, nor comprehended. Have we followed Him in there?

There we have a golden altar for the burning of incense, which was made from the free-will offerings of Israel. The spices that are used to produce a pleasing fragrance before the Lord are also free-will offerings. The fire that the Lord lets fall on the altar is the evidence that He is perfectly well pleased. In such an atmosphere, Christ and His elect carry out their priestly ministry.

The Ark of the Covenant was overlaid with gold, and in it was the golden pot containing the manna. The ark of the covenant in the heavenly places is the body of Christ. He is the bread that came down from heaven to give life to the world. With this bread we can grow up in every way into Him who is the Head of the church.

The Rod of Aaron which budded. In any dispute among the children of Israel regarding rank, seats, priestly service, doctrines, etc., there is an eternal decree that says that the one who has Aaron's budding rod will prevail. The person whose life flourishes so that it buds, blossoms and bears ripe almonds, has followed the Master to the place where the rod buds. Num. 17:7-11. God's promptings and His will lead to wisdom and to the scepter. That is why it is folly to strive against the truth. It is the same as fighting against Christ Himself.

The Tables of the Covenant. Here we have the judicial wisdom of the Spirit by which all earthly judges should establish their decisions if they want to pass righteous judgments.

Here books are written that the world cannot contain. They are contained in the Spirit, for in Christ's body are hidden all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2:3. By meditating on the laws in these books, we can be blessed. Ps. 1:2-3. He who does this shall be like a tree planted by the rivers of water that brings forth its fruit in its season, whose leaf shall not wither, and whatever he does shall prosper.

In the days of His flesh, Jesus deposited all His gold, silver, precious stones, and much more into this heavenly bank to receive all this glory in return. That is why He can say to His followers, "Buy from Me!!! Follow Me!!!"

"Then you will lay your gold in the dust, and the gold of Ophir among the stones of the brooks. Yes, the Almighty will be your gold and your precious silver . . . ." [3]

Verse 5. "And above it were the cherubim of glory overshadowing the mercy seat. Of these things we cannot now speak in detail."

The cherubim of glory were to be a hammered [4] work of gold. Ex. 25:18. This signifies the glory and power of Christ, in that He watches over what is in the ark. "Driven" work is a reference to Christ in the days of His flesh, because He was driven [5] by the Holy Spirit.

"And there I will meet with you, and I will speak with you from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubim which are on the ark of the Testimony, of all things which I will give you in commandment to the children of Israel." Ex. 25:22.

The cherubim symbolize God's watchfulness over us. God placed cherubim in Eden to guard the way to the tree of life. But now in these last days God speaks to us by His Son. He speaks from the mercy seat between the two cherubim. His words contain the spirit of the tablets of the law, the power and leadership of Aaron's rod, and the heavenly nourishment of the manna. These are words worth listening to!

Everything in the sanctuary was a free-will offering from the children of Israel. Ex. 35:5, 22.

"They came, both men and women, as many as had a willing heart, and brought earrings and nose rings, rings and necklaces, all jewelry of gold, that is, every man who made an offering of gold to the Lord." Verse 22.

"And all the women whose hearts stirred with wisdom spun yarn of goats' hairs." Verse 26. The Lord gave Bezaleel of the tribe of Judah wisdom, understanding and ability for all kinds of craftsmanship in order to make designs worked in gold, silver, and bronze, etc. To teach the others, God gave him Aholiab of the tribe of Dan. He was filled with skill to perform every work of engraving, designing and embroidering.

The skill to perform every work and all of the things that were needed for the sanctuary had to be sacrificed. God had given it, and He wanted it to be given back as a free-will offering. In this way Israel gained a share in the sanctuary, which was a shadow of the heavenly.

The question now is how much of a part do we have in the heavenly sanctuary where all the contents consist of "driven" work? Do we permit God's Spirit to drive us? Can He work in us both, to will and to do?





Chapter 10


Verse 1. "For the law, having a shadow of the good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with these same sacrifices, which they offer continually year by year, make those who approach perfect."

The law was only a shadow of the good things to come. Therefore it could never make those perfect who offered animal sacrifices year after year. The sin, which God wanted to destroy, did not dwell in the body of an animal, but in a human body.

Verse 5. "Therefore, when He came into the world, He said: 'Sacrifice and offering You did not desire, but a body You have prepared for Me.'" It was in the human body that God wanted to complete the work. Sin had entered man and it was to be driven out. God's will could never be done in a person in whose body sin was reigning. Human flesh was unable to rule over sin. Sin was too strong for the flesh, or, if you will, the flesh was powerless against sin.

Verse 7. "Then I said, 'Behold, I have come—in the volume of the book it is written of Me—to do Your will, O God.'" Never before was a person able to say: "I have come to do Your will, O God." No flesh was righteous before God; all had turned aside; they had all become unprofitable; there was none that did good, no, not one. Rom. 3:11-12.

However, now He came, the Master, Jesus of Nazareth, the Root of David, to do God's will. He successfully fulfilled all the good pleasure of the Father, so that in the end, He could cry out, "It is finished!"

This is how sin was conquered in Jesus' flesh. What was impossible for the law became possible by the will of God and the obedience of Jesus. Hallelujah! This is Christ manifested in the flesh. By faith we understand this. Herein lies the mystery of the victory that has overcome the world.

Verse 10. "By that will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all."

We are sanctified to do God's will by the power of God's Spirit and the grace we receive in our time of need. Sin shall not reign over us; we shall rule over it. "This is the covenant that I will make with them after those days, says the Lord: I will put My laws into their hearts, and in their minds I will write them."

In the old covenant, the law was written on tablets of stone, but now it is written in our hearts and minds; and God has given us power by the Holy Spirit to keep these laws, for He works in us both, to will and to do. This is the perfect law of liberty, which rules in our hearts and minds by the blood of Christ. The works of God are being done and made manifest. These are works that are the result of victory, which are approved by God who says, "To him who overcomes!!!" The overcomer has all the promises on his side. Rev. 2:7-11; 17-26, etc.

Verse 13. "And now He is only waiting that His enemies are laid at His feet as His footstool."

"The Lord said to my Lord, 'Sit at My right hand, till I make Your enemies Your footstool.' The Lord shall send the rod of Your strength out of Zion. Rule in the midst of Your enemies!" Ps. 110:1-2.

Here we read about Him who was appointed by God as the Messiah, the King of kings and the Lord of lords. His dominion will extend from coast to coast over all the earth. All His enemies will be placed under His feet. And why is that? Because He was victorious in the days of His flesh. He broke down the enmity in the body of His flesh through death, and thus destroyed him who had the power of death—the devil.

Therefore, it is futile to resist Jesus Christ by the strength of sin and the power of the devil. He defeated all of this long ago, and any renewed attempt will be beaten down, for He is the only Lord and Ruler.

Verses 19-20. "Therefore, brethren, having boldness to enter the Holiest in the blood of Jesus, by a new and living way which He consecrated for us, through the veil, that is, His flesh . . . ."

The new and living way goes through the flesh. In the flesh, man's big "I" is bound by sin. Here the death of Christ must work step by step, and God's will must be accomplished—all by faith.

Verses 21-22. "And having a High Priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water."

Our heavenly High Priest will help us go forward on this new and living way. He is called a "great High Priest", a great Helper, and He possesses great grace.

The apostle exhorts everyone who is walking on the new and living way to hold fast without wavering to the confession of the hope which enters within the veil. There is only one hope, and He is faithful who gave the promise.

Since we are together on the same way, let us consider one another so that we stir one another up to love and good works. This is the opposite of quarreling along the way.

Verse 25. "Not forsaking our own assembly, as is the manner of some." Which assembly does he have in mind? Of course, he is thinking of the assembly he has been addressing all this time, namely the assembly of those who are walking on the new and living way. Where can we find this assembly? It is just as difficult to point it out, as it is to point out the kingdom of God, which cannot be done. Just when you think you have found it, you realize you have made a mistake, for it consists only of those few individuals here and there who are walking in the light and judging themselves. Do not forsake this assembly, this fellowship with the Father, the Son and all the saints in the Holy Spirit.

The apostles had many churches, but there were only a few individuals who walked righteously and lived a victorious life. Do not forsake that assembly, where the preaching leads toward that goal. That is your assembly. Do this, for the Day is approaching.

Verses 26-27. "For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation which will devour the rebellious."

God's will is our sanctification. By this will we can walk on the new and living way and partake of God's kingdom with all its glory. This kingdom does not consist merely of words, but of power, righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit. God is infinitely gracious and merciful; He has given us a place in this kingdom that stands high above all the kingdoms here on earth.

If a person has learned to know the truth, to know this glorious kingdom, and then turns away from Him who speaks from heaven and sins willfully, he will meet a fearful judgment and fiery indignation which will devour the rebellious. Such a person is cast out from the kingdom that tolerates no sin, for if we live according to the flesh we will die. But the words that belong to the kingdom of God are spirit and life

Verses 28-29. "Anyone who has rejected Moses' law dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses. Of how much worse punishment, do you suppose, will he be thought worthy who has trampled the Son of God underfoot, counted the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified a common thing, and insulted the Spirit of grace?" "It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God." Verse 31.

Verses 32-39. "But recall the former days in which, after you were enlightened, you endured a great struggle with sufferings . . . ."

When we receive light, a great struggle with sufferings ensues. It is no small matter to take up the struggle against the flesh with its lusts. The Hebrews had suffered insults and tribulations for the sake of their faith, and now the apostle exhorts them to remember that and not to become weary.

Verse 35. "Do not cast away your boldness, which has great reward." If we are bold, we can make use of the opportunity. It is all too easy to let it slip away so that we lose our reward. We must awake so that we can be found ready and be in the right place at the right time.

Verse 36. "For you have need of patience, so that after you have done the will of God, you may receive the promise . . . ." Notice that it says, "after you have done the will of God." God's will must always be done, and after we have done it, we are to wait patiently for what is promised. "But the ones that fell on the good ground are those who, having heard the word with a noble and good heart, keep it and bear fruit with patience." Luke 8:15.

Patience leads us to a perfect work. Jesus is longsuffering with us, and Peter says that we are to consider this longsuffering as salvation. He praises Paul who has written about this with wisdom in his epistles. 2 Pet. 3:15-16.

The word of patience will save us from the hour of trial which shall come upon the whole world. Rev. 3:10. If you remain patient, you have stood the test.

Verse 38. "Now the just shall live by faith; but if anyone draws back, My soul has no pleasure in him."

Here he is writing about a consistent walk in the obedience of faith—going forward on the way of light. If any man draws back from this walk, God has no pleasure in him. This is "God's way" which meets opposition on every side. Yet there is no other way. Blessed is he who hears God's compelling voice and who walks on this way.

Verse 39. "But we are not of those who draw back to perdition, but of those who believe to the saving of the soul."





Chapter 11


Verse 1. "Now faith is the full assurance of things hoped for, the evidence of things not seen."

What a blessed faith! This is the victory that has overcome the world. Unbelief is chaos. The thoughts of an unbeliever swing restlessly, uncontrollably enmeshed in all sorts of problems, but faith brings everything into order. The full assurance of hope aligns a person's whole life with the blessed eternal values, just as the needle of a compass aligns itself with the magnetic poles. There is only one faith and one hope, and they are both in one and the same Spirit, the Spirit of truth. There is nothing false in this faith, this hope and this Spirit, where our anchor is firmly secured within the veil in the most Holy Place. This anchor never moves, for the cherubim of the Lord watch over it night and day. And no sin, nor any sinful person nor any evil spirit has access to God's sanctuary. That is why faith is the full assurance of those things that are hoped for. Blessed hope, which is anchored in a kingdom and upon a foundation that cannot be shaken!

Unbelief is a transgression of the law just as sin is. That is why it is so painful to talk to unbelieving people. Folly and lawlessness sit in high places; that is to say, people speak with authority and power as if what they were saying were reality, when in actual fact, all they speak are lies because they do not have faith.

Verse 2. "For by it the elders obtained a good testimony." Why did the elders obtain a good testimony through their faith? Because they walked in faith and it went extremely well with them. By faith they walked in the laws of righteousness and were blameless; their lives were blessed. This gave them a good testimony. They held fast to the invisible, to Him who cannot be seen. They found Him by seeking Him according to the law of a good conscience.

Verse 3. "By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that the things which are seen were not made of things which are visible."

By faith we understand!!! However, with unbelief we understand nothing. Faith brings a person into contact with God. Faith affects the entire person, for with the heart he believes, and life issues from his heart. When the eyes of our heart are enlightened, we are able to see things that otherwise are invisible, and the ears which God has opened are able to hear things that a natural ear cannot hear. That is why a heart that is opened to hear is the seat of righteous judgment. Jesus did not judge according to what His eyes saw or what His ears heard, but He judged with a righteous judgment. He judged according to things that are invisible, just as God will do on the day of judgment. He will judge according to the hidden things of men, according to the motives for their deeds. All this we understand by faith.

By faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God. How can that be? Because we understand that things which are seen are made of things which are invisible. Everything visible on this earth has its roots in the invisible, because everything has been created by Christ and for Christ. That is why Jesus spoke to the people in parables (using illustrations from everyday life) in order to lead their thoughts, if possible, to the underlying unseen powers. He did this to awaken faith in them. Yet most of them did not even understand the natural things, so how could they understand spiritual things? Despite the fact that people have within themselves the intrinsic capability to become gods, many of them become like devils because they let themselves be led by evil spirits and their own sinful lusts.

There is a veil between faith and unbelief. This must be torn from top to bottom, and then a person can behold wonderful things in God's laws and in God Himself. Nature can only explain nature to a certain extent. This is science. But Christ, by whom all things were created, is the wisdom of God. That is why a scientist with his natural understanding, which he has obtained by reading or experimenting, cannot comprehend God and His wisdom, the invisible, from which all natural things must necessarily proceed. This is the veil that all the scientists of this world have been unable to tear apart. Brorson [6] said, "Were all the kings set in a row, with all their might and mettle, the smallest leaf, they know not how to place upon a nettle." God has reserved for Himself the ability to create and to give growth. He has not entrusted that to any man. Why is that so? This we understand by faith!!!

Verse 6. "But without faith it is impossible to please Him, for he who comes to God must believe that He is, and that He is a rewarder of those who diligently seek Him."

It is impossible to pray to God without believing that He is; then we can pray and expect Him to hear us.

You can be certain that God is. In Him we live and move. He sustains all things; otherwise, they would pass away. God holds the stars in the heavens on their courses. He makes laws for men, animals, birds, and insects. He sets the laws of migration for birds and the fish of the sea, and He rules over the insects and over everything that has life on the earth.

God binds a man in the chains of his sin, and He frees him if he prays for forgiveness. He hardens a Pharaoh and humbles a Nebuchadnezzar. He chastises the nations with war, and He gives peace in its time, because war is of the Lord. Everything that is evil has come into the world through sin. God says to the Son, "Sit at My right hand, till I make Your enemies Your footstool." By this we understand that all politics and all wars will be shown in the end to be the means by which all the ungodly will be put under Christ's feet. This we understand by faith. How then can we do anything but believe that He is, and that He richly rewards those who take their refuge in Him?

We also know God through our conscience and through the promptings of His Spirit in our hearts to do what is right. When we do good, it makes us happy; but if we do what is evil, our countenance falls, and we have a bad conscience.

God's good Spirit is sent out over the entire world, convicting the world of sin, righteousness, and judgment. We believe that God is and that He is over all, through all, and in all.

What is your relationship to God?

Verse 8. "By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to the place which he would afterward receive as an inheritance. And he went out, not knowing where he was going." When God calls us, we must go out from wherever we are. The fact is that the calling from God leads us out of darkness into light, from the power of Satan to God. That is why we must say farewell to relatives and friends who are in darkness. Like Abraham we do not know where we are going, but by faith in God and in confidence toward Him who is love, we go out. We can see that it went well with Abraham, Enoch, Moses, Joshua, Gideon, Barak, Samson, Jephthah and others when they believed God and were obedient to Him. This tells us that it will also go well with us when we obey Him because God's will is our sanctification. Thus we can confidently go out when God calls us, because God's ways lead to light and glory. It is not only that God is, but also that He guides the details of our life through His beloved Son, Jesus Christ.

Verses 17-18. "By faith Abraham, when he was tested, offered up Isaac, and he who had received the promises offered up his only begotten son, of whom it was said, 'In Isaac your seed shall be called . . .' ." Faith and sacrifice go together. Faith assails our self-will; this tells us that faith is divine, whereas my self-will belongs to my corrupt flesh. Abraham loved his son Isaac, and he had to fight intense battles in order to obey God who insisted that Isaac be sacrificed. Abraham was obedient to God. The promises to Abraham were through Isaac, but now when he was to be sacrificed, Abraham had to believe that Isaac would be raised from the dead. Amazing faith and confidence in God! Abraham received Isaac back again, just as though he had been resurrected from the dead. This is a picture of God who sacrificed His Son and raised Him up from the dead.

Verse 29. "By faith they passed through the Red Sea as by dry land, whereas the Egyptians, attempting to do so, were drowned."

Everything is possible by faith. By faith, Jesus walked on the sea. By faith, Peter followed Him, but when unbelief overcame him, he sank. By faith, Joseph kept an entire nation alive. By faith, Jesus could bear Judas having the moneybox even though He knew that he was a thief. By faith, He understood that Judas would betray Him because of the sin which he had inherited—miserliness. By faith, Jesus told His disciples nothing about Judas until His time had come.

Verse 30. "By faith the walls of Jericho fell down after they were encircled for seven days." By faith the people shouted and blew the trumpets. When the people heard the trumpets, they let out a war cry, and by faith all the walls fell down. The people went up into the city, every man straight before him, and took it. Josh. 6:20. The war cry, the sound of the trumpet, and the promises of God made faith come alive so that the walls had to fall. They would have fallen even if they had been made of steel.

By faith, David placed the stone in the sling, and in the name of the Lord of Sabaoth, he went against Goliath who had defied the armies of the Lord. Even if Goliath's forehead had been ten meters thick, David's smooth stone would have pierced it. By faith Samson was strong.

Verses 33-34. "Who through faith subdued kingdoms, worked righteousness, obtained promises, stopped the mouths of lions, quenched the violence of fire, escaped the edge of the sword, out of weakness were made strong, became valiant in battle, turned to flight the armies of the aliens," etc.

Verses 37-38. "They were stoned, they were sawn in two, were tempted, were slain with the sword. They wandered about in sheepskins and goatskins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented—of whom the world was not worthy. They wandered in deserts and mountains, in dens and caves of the earth."

They did all these things through faith, which gave them power, divine power. What is there then that we cannot conquer and endure with this same faith? Nothing! We can do all things through faith, the faith that draws God's Spirit and power down to us.

So let us exercise ourselves in faith and patience, and thus we shall be more than conquerors through Him who loves us.





Chapter 12


Verse 1. Chapter 11 mentions a great crowd of witnesses. Having seen and considered their lives, we must also lay aside every weight, and the sin which so easily ensnares us, and run with patience the race that is set before us. Here we are speaking of a life that has to be lived, of many things to lay aside, and of a battle that is set before us. What are the things that we are to lay aside, and in an ever-deeper degree? Hypocrisy, flattery, respect of persons, aimless chatter, backbiting, love of money, cowardice, thinking only of oneself, wanting to be more than one really is, wanting to be something according to the flesh, being a know-it-all, being vain, etc. Someone might ask. "Can these things easily ensnare us even after we have been baptized with the Holy Spirit?" Yes, as long as we are in this earthly body, they can. When a preacher wants to be called "Pastor," isn't that just the lust to be highly esteemed? Or if there are some in the church who are always maneuvering to be in the company of those who are highly regarded, what is this other than pride and self-exaltation? And when the pastor begs for money in the church, is this not just a manifestation of greed? The members of the church want to give as little as possible, and the pastor wants to get as much as possible.

Anoint your eyes with eye salve and you will see many manifestations of the sin which so easily ensnares us. Some will ask, what other things can there be? Well, there is the envy of Cain. You would like to be the leading brother, and then one is chosen who, in your eyes, is far inferior to you. You want to be the music leader, but then someone else comes along who has the nature of a lion and takes over the whole show. You want to appear to be a refined, intelligent and well-educated person, but then someone else comes along who makes you feel inferior.

There certainly is much to crucify. Never commit the folly of saying that sin has been removed from the flesh. Rather say that "wisdom has been removed,' and that only folly remains. Then you will be considerably closer to he truth—that is, if there actually ever was any wisdom present to be removed.

Verse 2. "Looking unto Jesus, the author and finisher of our faith, who for the joy that was set before Him endured the cross, despising the shame, and has sat down at the right hand of the throne of God."

Through faith, by remaining on the cross, and by suffering in the flesh, we can overcome all the things that are mentioned above. Jesus is the author of our faith. He overcame, and we can overcome. Read in Revelation: "He who overcomes!"

When a church is full of such sins and they are allowed to flourish without being reproved, it is an "assembly of the dead." Go out from among them. Such an assembly lacks the testimony of the Spirit, the water and the blood. Instead, it has the testimony of the flesh—the tree is known by its fruits.

Jesus is the author and the finisher of faith. This proves that Jesus is a way of faith. We cannot put off everything in one day, but little by little, through Jesus' commandments and light on the inner ways, we receive power to lay aside everything that hinders us and run on the way of faith the race that is set before us. It is here that transformation takes place, from faith to faith, from light to light, from power to power, and from victory to victory. All of this happens through the second Adam who became a life-giving spirit. This is the way of God, and it meets opposition everywhere. Only the upright of heart will progress on this way! This is the way of faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. On this way there are no beasts of prey, just those who love the appearing of our Lord Jesus Christ and who walk in the light.

Verse 3. "For consider Him who endured such hostility from sinners against Himself, lest you become weary and discouraged in your souls."

The hostility Jesus endured from sinners came primarily from the religious people of His time. It is just the same today. These people think they know something because of their studying and reading of the Scriptures and religious books, yet they have no revelation from the Spirit. Priests and pastors are the worst opposers of the way of God. Therefore they continue to be unfruitful trees. Worldly wisdom and empty deceit have fooled them. Their desire for vainglory has led them away from Christ, away from Him in whom all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hidden. The theologians' knowledge of Greek is of no benefit to them, because the Spirit that leads us into all the truth speaks to us Norwegians in Norwegian. Think that the Advocate can speak Norwegian! [7] A theologian once said that we would be better off if we learned Greek. Jesus says, "The words that I speak to you are spirit, and they are life." He does not use a dead language to speak to the living. We must bear with patience all such hostility from sinners, so that we do not become weary in our souls. God's way clears a path through thorns and thistles, right to the Father Himself.

Verse 4. "You have not yet resisted to bloodshed, striving against sin." This is the goal, the testimony of the blood, that we resist sin unto bloodshed.

Miserliness, envy, the "pastor," the "reverend," megalomania, and all other such madness die here. All that remains is a new creation. And think: Jesus Christ speaks to this new creation in his own mother tongue! We can be glad for that. Otherwise we would have to pay some theologian to write us a prescription in order to get rid of the sin that so easily ensnares us. People come up with all sorts of ways to make a living. But now we are freed from all this. Praised and honored be God! Freely we have received and freely we give, for we have been redeemed by the precious blood of Jesus, without silver or gold.

Verse 8. "But if you are without chastening of which all have become partakers, then you are illegitimate and not sons." It is a chastening for us human beings who have a sinful flesh to keep the commandments of God, because the Spirit struggles against the flesh and the flesh against the Spirit. Everyone who is not familiar with this warfare, this chastening, is illegitimate. The same sufferings are experienced by all our brothers in the world. The more obedient we are to the Spirit, the more we suffer in the flesh, but the greater the promises as well: If we suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified with Him. This is the proof that we are genuine sons.

Verse 11. "Now no chastening seems to be joyful for the present, but grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to those who have been trained by it."

When we were children, our parents chastened us according to their own pleasure, to give us an upbringing. Though it did not feel good while we were being chastened, the benefits came later in life. So it is with all chastisement. God scourges every son whom He receives. But after we have been trained to bear the chastening, we understand that it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness. Moreover, we abstain from evil lusts to avoid severe chastisement. That is why it is written: "It is for chastisement that you endure sufferings." [8] We choose to suffer in the flesh and be obedient rather than to be disobedient and face chastisement.

Verses 12-13. "Therefore strengthen the hands which hang down, and the feeble knees, and make straight paths for your feet, so that what is lame may not be dislocated, but rather be healed."

First he wrote about chastening and how necessary it is. While we are being chastened, it seems to be grievous, not joyful. A person's knees grow weak and his hands hang down, and he thinks: "It's no use walking on this narrow way." But it is worthwhile! Chastisement is just the right medicine. It produces wisdom, frees you from arrogance and high-mindedness, and makes you spiritually fit. It is like getting a navigational sighting from heaven so you can tell exactly where you are. Generally speaking, people believe that they are much further ahead on the way than they really are. Chastening is our life—love it. Pray to God for help in the time of need, and chastening will become your daily food. Without it, you will not thrive. It contains all the vitamins we need. Remember this when your knees become shaky.

Verse 14. "Pursue peace with all men, and sanctification, without which no one will see the Lord . . . ." It is impossible to pursue peace with all men without partaking of sanctification. You cannot pursue peace with God and Satan. Peace with Herod and Pilate would corrupt us. But to pursue peace with all men in the context of sanctification makes sense.

Verse 15. "Looking carefully lest anyone draw back from the grace of God; lest any root of bitterness springing up cause trouble, and by this many become defiled . . . ." Drawing back from the grace of God is the same as drawing back from God's help, His strength and His wisdom. That leads only to corruption. God's grace is the victory that Jesus Christ won in the days of His flesh. Thus, grace reigns through righteousness. Through this grace, we receive help to help ourselves. When chastening is not able to work as it should and is not received as a grace from God, a bitter root springs up. It results in quarreling and contradiction. Some take sides with one person and some with another. For those who get involved in such things, the result is only corruption. Such bitter roots can easily spring up where there is no one with wisdom and understanding who can resolve disagreements between brethren. The desire for vainglory manifests itself. This happens in spite of the fact that God will not share His honor with any stranger. Be done with all quarreling, and endure hardship. Then the bitter roots will die by themselves.

Verse 22. "But you have come to Mount Zion and to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, to an innumerable company of angels . . . ."

The city of the living God is the bride. Rev. 21. Mount Zion is the unshakable, immovable city in the Spirit. The innumerable company of angels is that tremendous help that is always at work on behalf of all those who believe. This help can be sensed and felt. "To the general assembly and church of the firstborn who are registered in heaven, to God the Judge of all, to the spirits of just men made perfect . . . ."

Verse 24. But you have come "to Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaks better things than that of Abel."

This is the deep rest which some will enter into—a rest together with the general assembly, with God the Judge of all, with the Mediator of a new covenant, and by the blood of sprinkling. Isn't this a secure place to rest? Has not Satan been cast out from the presence of God and Christ? Yes, he certainly has, so you can rest quite securely there.

Verse 25. "See that you do not refuse Him who speaks. For if they did not escape who refused Him who spoke on earth, much more shall we not escape if we turn away from Him who speaks from heaven . . . ." Take heed that you do not refuse Him who speaks. This is the Advocate, Jesus Christ. Everything that is glorious is in Him, and He wants to share it all with us. He has been speaking from heaven since He brought the sacrifice, and thus all the fullness of the Godhead dwells in Him. We shall not escape if we turn away from Him who speaks so clearly.

God spoke through Moses, from the earth, before the body of Christ was sacrificed, and those who did not heed His word received their well-deserved punishment. How much greater punishment will there be for those who turn away from Him who speaks from heaven? It is these words from heaven that lead us into rest in the heavenly Canaan, and which bring us into contact with all the glories of heaven.

When He spoke from the earth, the earth shook, but now He speaks from heaven, and both earth and heaven are shaken.

Verse 28. "Therefore, since we are receiving a kingdom which cannot be shaken, let us be thankful."





Chapter 13


Verse 1. "Let brotherly love continue." This exhortation tells us that we can be diligent to love the brothers. We must do that, because it is Jesus' command. When unrighteousness abounds, love grows cold. So be righteous toward the brothers. Do everything you can to make Christ's law of love work as a leaven in the brotherhood. Then fellowship with the Father, the Son and the church will increase. The kingdom of God will flourish, and the Prince of Peace will reign among us.

Verse 2. "Do not forget hospitality, for by so doing some have unwittingly entertained angels." Be hospitable without complaining. Open your door to servants of the Word, and to others who need a place to stay. We only live once, and the day that has passed will never return. So do good while you are still alive, for your reward will be according to your deeds. Without knowing it, some have entertained angels. Without knowing it, you can receive servants of God into your house who can be of eternal blessing to you and your family. For it is written, "He who receives you receives Me, and he who receives Me receives Him who sent Me."

Verse 4. "Marriage is honorable among all . . . ." This means let marriage be undefiled by flesh and spirit, so that love in the spirit does not degenerate into a love according to the flesh. Here we need to be alert.

Verse 5. "Let your conduct be without covetousness; be content with such things as you have. For He Himself has said, 'I will never leave you nor forsake you.'"

The love of money is a root of all kinds of evil. Because of it, unrighteousness rules and the oil of gladness is lost. Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above and comes down from the Father of lights, with whom there is no variation or shadow of turning. A person who loves money is incapable of giving a good and perfect gift, so he sows sparingly and he will also reap sparingly.

Nabal was struck down by the Lord and died because of his greed, but his wife was blessed because she came to David and his men with food at the right time. If you want your righteousness to endure forever and your memory to be blessed, then give what you have liberally while you are alive, for no one can do any good in the grave. Besides, silver and gold belong to the Lord, and if you have some, that means that you have received a gift over which you are to be a faithful steward. We are to serve one another with the gifts we have received. When we live frugally, it does not take so much to get by. Godliness with contentment is great gain.

Verse 7. "Remember your guides, who have spoken the word of God to you, whose faith follow, considering the outcome of their conduct."

After speaking about the love of money, the apostle exhorts us to remember those who have given us guidance, who have spoken the word of God to us. This is another way of saying: "You shall not muzzle an ox while it treads out the grain," and "the laborer is worthy of his wages." No one can speak the word of God unless he has been sent. And when he gives you spiritual goods, is it such a great thing if you give him some of your temporal goods? When you see the outcome of their conduct, follow their faith. Not all have the same works, but all have faith. Those who spoke the word of God to you followed the faith they had, and you who have not been sent, but live a godly life, are following your faith. Those who have spoken the word of God to you are your examples when you see the outcome of their lives. For truly every seed is in danger right until the harvest.

Verse 9. "Do not be carried about with various and strange doctrines. For it is good that the heart be established by grace, not with foods which have not profited those who have been occupied with them."

The word of God is food; it is spirit and life. These various and strange doctrines lead people astray. Haven't we seen this? We certainly have. The word of God is never wrong. These other doctrines appear to be food, but they are only dry teachings—head knowledge—and have not profited anyone. Jesus' words are spirit and life, and they create fellowship in the Spirit and fellowship in life. When it says that it is good that the heart is strengthened with grace, then it means with the revelations of Jesus Christ. Dry doctrines contain neither grace nor revelation—only delusion. Jesus says, "My sheep hear My voice." But the voices of these various doctrines lead people away from hearing the voice of the Chief Shepherd to listening to the voices of self-appointed hirelings and preachers out to make a living, whose words are far from spirit and life. Beware of them!

Verse 10. "We have an altar from which those who serve the tabernacle have no right to eat."

Serving the tabernacle is an outward service. In the old covenant, sacrifices and meat offerings were offered on this altar for the forgiveness of sins. However, now in the new covenant, the completed work of Christ has been reduced to the forgiveness of sins—just the forgiveness of sins—or serving the tabernacle as in the old covenant. Nevertheless, Jesus is the way, the truth and the life. He will lead us to all the truth.

Just as there is an altar for outward service, there is also an altar for inward service. The forgiveness of sins is a washing of the body with pure water, because every sin that a man commits is outside the body. But walking in the light just as He is in the light gives the blood of the inner life opportunity to cleanse away all sin.

We have a right to eat of this altar. But those who only serve the tabernacle have no right to eat of this altar, because the enmity (the flesh) opposes this service.

Verse 11. "For the bodies of those animals, whose blood is brought into the sanctuary by the high priest for sin, are burned outside the camp."

In the old covenant (the shadow), the high priest took the blood of the animal into the sanctuary, and the body was burned outside the camp. It is just the same in the new covenant. The body must be taken outside the camp, away from all the religiosity that goes on in religious sects and denominations, to Him—outside the camp—in order to suffer and die together with Christ, to resist sin unto bloodshed, to be conformed to the image of the Son. Then our heavenly High Priest takes that blood into the sanctuary. The soul is in the blood. Jesus poured out His soul to death. The first Adam was a living soul, but the second Adam became a life-giving spirit. Our spirit is to be made alive and our soul is to be poured out. Our life in this world is in the soul. We must lose our lives in order to find life. The blood is taken by the High Priest into the sanctuary. Here we will receive our souls once more at the resurrection of the dead, when body, soul and spirit are reunited.

While we are on earth, the body is dead because of sin, but the spirit is life because of righteousness. This body is now presented to God as a pleasing sacrifice, and this is our spiritual worship.

Verse 12. "Therefore Jesus also, that He might sanctify the people with His own blood, suffered outside the gate."

The people are inside the camp. All of the twelve tribes of Israel were there. But He who was to sanctify the people with His blood, Jesus Christ, had to suffer and die outside the camp. Note the phrase: "Sanctify the people"! This is the service of the tabernacle, the outward cleansing.

Verse 13. "Therefore let us go forth to Him, outside the camp, bearing His reproach."

Jesus is still outside the camp, and it is a reproach to go out there and be conformed to Him. There is no reproach in staying in some denomination, but if you truly go out to Him—outside the camp—then the reproach begins.

The work goes on outside the camp; it can never take place inside. It is there, on the outside, that God has ordained the blessing. That is the place where the Lord reveals Himself. Harlotry can never flourish there, because there is a cross, a death and blood over all flesh, but for the spirit, it is glorious.

Verse 14. "For here we have no continuing city, but we seek the one to come."

This was also the faith Abraham had, the way he thought. He was waiting for the city with eternal foundations, whose builder and maker is God. That is why he was a stranger and a pilgrim in the Promised Land. This is precisely our situation. We are strangers and pilgrims in the world.

Verse 16. "But do not forget to do good and to share, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased."

There are many things of which we need to be reminded. Among them is doing good and sharing with others. There is a sacrifice in this, too. That is why it is written, "With such sacrifices God is well pleased," and "Who sends rain on the just and on the unjust." [9]

Verse 17.

No one can be a guide for others unless he himself is being led by the great Chief Shepherd.

Before Peter could feed and watch over the sheep and the lambs, he had to promise Jesus that he loved Him more than them.

In Ezekiel 44:10 ff., it speaks of shepherds who clung more to the people than to the Lord. The people had money and food, so the priests went along with them. They loved their own bellies more than God and His commandments. They were priests for the people. They were not true guides, because it was the people who were guiding them.

However, the Levitical priests, the sons of Zadok, stood firmly with the Lord when the people went astray. Because of that, they were appointed to be priests for God and to take care of the things He wanted to be cared for. They were the true guides. Read from verse 15.

Verses 21-21. "Now may the God of peace, who brought up our Lord Jesus from the dead, that great Shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant, make you complete in every good work to do His will, working in you what is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever and ever. Amen."

Here God is called the God of peace, who brought up the great Shepherd of the sheep from the dead through the blood of the everlasting covenant. Blood had to flow before God could be called the God of peace. God's will had to be done unto bloodshed. That is why these three must testify: the Spirit, the water and the blood. It was for the sake of this testimony that John was exiled to the island of Patmos, where he saw wondrous things that reached far into eternity.

God give us all grace to hold firmly to the Word and to the testimony!




Footnotes

	 	 [1] A Norwegian revivalist lay preacher (Apr. 3,1771 - Mar. 29, 1824) who was persecuted by the established State Church.



	 	 [2] In the Apocrypha



	 	 [3] Job 22:24-25.



	 	 [4] Driven - Norwegian.



	 	 [5] Norwegian Bible translation.



	 	 [6] A Norwegian poet.



	 	 [7] J.O. Smith's meaning is that the Spirit who leads us into all truth speaks to us in our mother tongue, whatever that may be.



	 	 [8] Hebrews 12:7 - Norwegian translation. NKJV (margin) reads: It is for discipline that you endure.



	 	 [9] Matthew 5:45.





