The Gospel of God





Sigurd Bratlie





License


	 		This e-Book is licensed to:



		Hans-Willem van der Waal

		jwh.vd.waal@filternet.nl

		Church: Rotterdam



		Downloaded from Brunstad Portal: 12/25/2015



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag





Colophon




	The Gospel of God





	Sigurd Bratlie





	 		Translated from the Norwegian

		Original title: Guds Evangelium

		First published in 1988



		English Edition: First Edition 1992



		e-Book version: 2012 (revision: 21-5-2012)

		ISBN 978-82-8253-047-7 (ePub format)



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag

		P.O. Box 900

		3168 Melsomvik

		Norway



		www.ssfnett.no

		www.brunstad.org





		 		Scripture quotations are from the Revised Standard Version of the Bible (1971 Ed.) unless otherwise indicated.

		Scripture reference portions which reflect the Norwegian translation used by the author are marked with an asterisk*





Copyright and terms of use




Copyright



			 	© This material is protected by the copyright law. Reproduction and/or making the material publicly available, is prohibited without the prior written consent of Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc., P.O. Box 2846, Winnipeg, MB Canada R3C 4B4, if not as the result of invariable established law. Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, P.B. 900, Brunstad, N-3168 Melsomvik, Norway [including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc.]

	(See www.ssfnett.no and www.brunstad.org)





Terms of use



	This e-Book is licensed only for personal use and can thus not be resold or given to other persons. 	If you want to share this book with others, you can refer them to portal.brunstad.org. 	If you read this e-Book and not have your own personalized copy, you should go to portal.brunstad.org and download your own copy.



	Thank you for respecting these terms of use.





Foreword


It is on my heart to expose the terrible deception that the spirit of Antichrist has succeeded in introducing among the millions of people who call on the name of God. This spirit has explained away the obedience of faith—and with it, the whole gospel.

The spirit of Antichrist has also falsified grace, with the result that most of these people believe they are God's children, when in fact they are not. In order to shed light on this deception—and thereby reveal true grace and the gospel as well—I have arranged the subject matter in a series of brief chapters, each containing this subject as the recurring theme. This way you will be able to red them separately and gain an understanding of the deception in the specific area you are interested in. This deception has had an effect on every aspect of life.

It is amazing how this deception had already taken hold so firmly in the time of the apostles. When you read their epistles, you will see how earnestly the apostles warn against this deception, exhorting us to be on guard against it. Now if this was the state of affairs in the time of the apostles, what about in our own day and age!

It is my hope that, after reading these chapters, you will have gained a thorough understanding of this deception.

This book is intended for those who want to be disciples, for those who are seeking true godliness.

Your happy brother in grace and salvation,

Sigurd Bratlie





The Gospel of God


Romans 1


"Paul, a servant of Jesus Christ, called to be an apostle, set apart for the gospel of God which he promised beforehand through his prophets in the holy scriptures, the gospel concerning his Son, who was descended from David according to the flesh and designated Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness by his resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord." Romans 1:1-4.

The Old Testament prophets prophesied about Jesus in Isaiah 7:14-15 and in chapters 9 and 53. We also read about Him in Micah 5, and in many, many other scriptures. In the New Testament we can find prophecies about Him in Luke 24:25-27, Acts 18:28, 1 Peter 1:10-13, and other places.

In the above verses Paul briefly explains in two parts the gospel of God concerning Jesus: (1) who He is according to the flesh, and (2) who He is according to the Spirit. If we disregard or change either one of these parts, we do not have the gospel of God.

What does it mean that He was descended from David according to the flesh? Quite simply, it means what it says. We know about David and his seed. Paul was of the same lineage. Hebrews 2:16. Paul says concerning himself, "For I know that nothing good dwells within me, that is, in my flesh." Romans 7:18. And Jesus' flesh was just like that.

According to the Spirit of holiness He was designated Son of God in power by His resurrection from the dead. We cannot change this fact either. So the question arises: When He came to earth in that body which was of the seed of David, did He come with all the fullness of God in His Spirit? The answer is "No", because it is written, ". . . who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even death on a cross." Philippians 2:6-8. We often hear it said, "He was true God and true Man." But his is not true if you mean that He retained all God's fullness when He came to earth in the body that was of the seed of David. Nor is this statement appropriate in light of what is written in Hebrews 12:2, ". . . looking to Jesus the pioneer and perfecter of our faith."





What Took Place in Jesus During the Days of His Flesh?


"In the days of his flesh, Jesus offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to him who was able to save him from death, and he was heard for his godly fear. Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he suffered; and being made perfect he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him, being designated by God a high priest after the order of Melchizedek." Hebrews 5:7-10.

We read that His prayers were heard. Thus it could not have been His death on the cross of Calvary that He prayed to be saved from, for He had to suffer that death in order to reconcile all things to God. Colossians 1:19-22 and 2 Corinthians 5:19. "For if you live according to the flesh you will die . . . ." Romans 8:13. It was on account of this death that He offered up prayers and supplications, with loud cries and tears, to Him who was able to save Him from death, His prayers were heard; and death could not hold Him. Here again we have both parts of the gospel.

In Hebrews 2:14-15, we read, "Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same nature, that through death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong bondage."

In Genesis we read how the serpent, by a lie, deceived Eve into thinking she would become like God, by knowing good and evil. The serpent tempted Eve with a glory that he said she could gain by disobedience; but the result was death. However, Jesus came with death first, and through death he destroyed him who had the power of death. He came with death to the lusts and desires of the flesh, which are the cause of all the corruption in the world, and which end in death. 2 Peter 1:4. But by the death that Jesus came with, we come—through obedience—to that glory with which the serpent tempted Eve.

Nearly everyone believes the same lie Eve believed, and they end up in corruption. Jesus, on the other hand, by first putting to death all the lusts and desires, destroyed him

who had the power of death; and for those who believe, the power of him who had the power of death is also destroyed. This was proven by Jesus' resurrection from the dead on the third day. Paul had come to faith in this, and by the knowledge of Jesus he could say, "For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain." Philippians 1:21-23.

"For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do; sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh." Romans 8:3. This was the first part of the gospel; it made the second part possible.

Romans 8:3 is the foundation of the gospel which is offered to us in verse 4: ". . . in order that the just requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit." Preachers usually do not read verse 4. They teach that what is written there is something Jesus did for us—in our stead. Their reason for teaching this is that they also explain away the first part of Paul's explanation of the gospel in Romans 1:3. Consequently, they have no basis for believing that they can fulfill the just requirement of the law. When they preach Jesus, they can only preach the forgiveness of sins on the basis of Jesus' death on Calvary. Actually, they have no gospel at all.





Serving in the Newness of the Spirit and not in the Oldness of the Letter


Romans 7:4-6


"Likewise, my brethren, you have died to the law through the body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to him who has been raised from the dead in order that we may bear fruit for God. While we were living in the flesh, our sinful passions, aroused by the law, were at work in our members to bear fruit for death. But now we are freed* from the law, dead to that which held us captive, so that we serve not under the old written code but in the new life of the Spirit."

"For the love of Christ constrains us, because we are convinced that one has died for all, therefore all have died. And he died for all, that those who live might live no longer for themselves but for him who for their sake died and was raised." 2 Corinthians 5:14-15.*

"For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do: sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the just requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit." Romans 8:3-4.

God did something altogether new, "Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same nature, that through death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong bondage." Hebrews 2:14-15. Here we read about the mighty work, which God did in and through His Son, a work that made it possible for the just requirement of the law to be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit. Then we, too, begin to serve in the newness of the Spirit. Most professing Christians know nothing of this, and so they never come to live a godly life. They reckon that Jesus fulfilled the law in our stead. But then we must ask: Where do they get this understanding? Just what is the requirement of the law? It is this: "You shall not covet." Romans 7:7.

"You have heard that it was said, 'You shall not commit adultery.' But I say to you that everyone who looks at a woman lustfully has already committed adultery with her in his heart.'" Matthew 5:27-28. In this passage Jesus shows us the fulfillment of the law: You shall not covet. Lust (covetousness) is hidden from others, which is why the law was powerless, because it was weakened by the flesh. Therefore, God had to send His Son in the flesh in which lust dwells, in order to condemn lust in the flesh; and Jesus put this lust to death in the flesh. That is why it is written, "In the likeness of sinful flesh." In us the lusts have been actively at work; thus our flesh has become sinful. We read "that through death he might destroy him who had the power of death, that is, the devil." The death mentioned here is death to the lusts in the flesh. Jesus came with this new kind of death. And because He put the lusts in the flesh to death—He did not commit sin—therefore, death could not hold Him. The resurrection from the dead proved that He was god's Son. Romans 1:3-4.

Since this death was first active in Jesus, it is called the death (or dying) of Jesus. We can carry this same death in our bodies, and then the life of Jesus will also be manifested in our bodies. 2 Corinthians 4:10-11. We read of Jesus, "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God." Hebrews 9:14. He poured out His Spirit upon the apostles on the day of Pentecost. At that time they were endued with power from on high, as Jesus had promised them. Acts 1:8. Only then could they begin to serve in the newness of life, in the new ministry of the Spirit. In this ministry, sin in the flesh was put to death; this is what enabled the disciples to be Jesus' witnesses. However, the Spirit was not only sent to give them power, but also to guide them into all truth. John 16:13. This is what God did with Jesus when He "condemned sin in the flesh." Jesus is the pioneer and perfecter of our faith. Hebrews 12:2.

Jesus had to live by faith. He Himself did not know how to condemn sin in the flesh; it was God who condemned sin in the flesh, and Jesus co-operated by offering Himself up in the power of an eternal Spirit. Jesus consecrated this way for us into the sanctuary. When it was consecrated, the veil of the temple was rent from top to bottom. "By this the Holy Spirit indicates that the way into the sanctuary is not yet opened as long as the outer tent is still standing." Hebrews 9:8. When Jesus cried, "It is finished," the veil was rent and the way was open. Before this, only the High Priest could enter the sanctuary, but not without blood. He did not enter in with his own blood, but with the blood of animals. Jesus, on the other hand, entered in with His own blood and secured an eternal redemption. Hebrews 9:11-12.

When the Father condemned sin in the flesh, Jesus was obedient and offered Himself up in the power of an eternal Spirit. He inaugurated this ministry in the newness of the Spirit; and in so doing, He produced the blood of the covenant. "Then I said, 'Lo, I have come to do thy will, O God' . . . He abolishes the first in order to establish the second." Hebrews 10:7-10. "Now may the God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep . . . ." Hebrews13:20. He came "not with the water only but with the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the witness, because the Spirit is the truth." 1 John 5:6-10.

The blood of Jesus gives us boldness to enter the sanctuary. But we must serve in the newness of the Spirit, or we will not come to the testimony of the blood; nor will we have the boldness to enter the sanctuary. Jesus said: "He who loves his life loses it, and he who hates his life in this world will keep it for eternal life. If any one serves me, he must follow me; and where I am, there shall my servant be also; if any one serves me, the Father will honor him." John 12:25-26. Then we are serving in the newness of the Spirit and not in the oldness of the letter.

The Pharisees, after catching a woman in the act of adultery, said to Jesus: "'Now in the law Moses commanded us to stone such. What do you say about her?' . . . Jesus bent down and wrote with his finger on the ground. And as they continued to ask him, he stood up and said to them, 'Let him who is without sin among you be the first to throw a stone at her.'" (I wonder if He didn't write on the ground what Moses says further on: 'You shall not covet.") Then it goes on to say: "Then those who heard it, being convicted by their conscience, went out one by one." John 8:5-11. (NKJV) Jesus had quite a different gospel to give her: "Go, and do not sin again."

The Pharisees were serving in the oldness of the letter. This ministry is also called the "ministry of death." We read about these two ministries in 2 Corinthians 3. There, in verses 17 and 18, we see the result of serving in the newness of the Spirit. "Therefore, having this ministry by the mercy of God, we do not lose heart." 2 Corinthians 4:1. This ministry leads us to fellowship in the Spirit, to the unity that Jesus prayed for: ". . . that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, so that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." John 17:21.





Temptation


"Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various temptations, knowing that the testing of your faith produces patience." James 1:2-3*. "Let no one say when he is tempted, 'I am tempted by God'; for God cannot be tempted with evil and he himself tempts no one; but each person is tempted when he is lured and enticed by his own desire. Then desire when it has conceived gives birth to sin; and sin when it is full-grown brings forth death. Verses 13-15.

These verses tell us that we have not sinned just because we are tempted. Rather, temptation tests our faith. Only after temptation has conceived does it give birth to sin; it takes my mind captive, and I begin to lust. But then I have not followed Jesus; I have not served in the newness of the Spirit. If I had, I would have put the lust to death by the Spirit, and instead of sin, the life of Jesus would have come forth from my body. The Spirit would then have been able to witness with my spirit that I was a child of God, and in the blood of Jesus I would have had boldness to enter the sanctuary.

We read further in James 1:12*: "Blessed is the man who endures temptation, for when he has stood the test he will receive the crown of life which God has promised to those who love him." As we can see, we have great opportunities in temptations. And we read that we are blessed if we endure, for then we receive a tested faith, which is precious indeed! 1 Peter 1:6-7.

"Since then we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession. For we have not a high priest who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses, but one who in every respect has been tempted as we are, yet without sin. Let us then with confidence draw near to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need [at the right time*]." Hebrews 4:14-16.

Just when is "the right time"? The "right time" is when I am tempted. That is when I can receive grace to serve in the newness of the Spirit so that the cause of my temptations—my own lusts—can be put to death, and the life of Jesus can be manifested by my body. Being tempted is the same thing as being led to my enemies, just as the Israelites were led to their enemies when they set out to conquer the Promised Land. "Blessed are those whose strength is in thee, whose heart is stayed on level paths. When they go through the valley of tears, they make it a place of springs; and the early rain covers it with blessing. They win one victory after another, so one can see that God is in Zion" Psalm 84:5-7.* (Verse 7 from the German)

Jesus was well acquainted with our weaknesses. But the question is this: Are we acquainted with our own weaknesses? Hebrews 5:7-10 proves that He was acquainted with our weaknesses.

We read that He was saved from death, yet He died for our sins. We were redeemed by the precious blood of Christ, like that of a lamb without spot or blemish. 1 Peter 1:19. What was this death from which He was saved? "For if you live according to the flesh you will die . . . ." Romans 8:13. Jesus had this flesh; He was acquainted with our weaknesses, and He knew how easily we are tempted. Therefore He fought this great battle, and He was saved from that death which is a consequence of living according to the flesh. He remained without sin despite the fact that He was tempted in every respect as we are.

That is why the apostle could write, "and we bring you the good news that what God promised to the fathers, this he has fulfilled to us their children by raising Jesus." Acts 13:32-33. "But he whom God raised up saw no corruption. Let it be known to you therefore, brethren, that through this man forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, and by him every one that believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses." Verses 37-39.

What they could not be freed from by the law of Moses was this: "You shall not covet." It was sin in the flesh that God condemned in the flesh of Jesus. It was there that all lust was put to death. That took time. What Jesus consecrated for us was a "way", and on this way He became our forerunner. This is the hope to which we have fled for refuge, which hope we have as "a sure and steadfast anchor of the soul, a hope that extends beyond the veil, where Jesus has gone as a forerunner for us; having become a high priest for ever according to the order of Melchizedek." Hebrews 6:18-20*





The New and Living Way


Putting to death sin in the flesh was not accomplished in an instant. God did not give Jesus light about everything all at once. Not at all! Jesus consecrated a new and living way, which God beforehand had prepared for us. This way went through the flesh of Jesus, who had the same flesh as we do. Therefore, He consecrated this way for us into the sanctuary. Hebrews 10:19-20. Concerning Him we read: ". . . who though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form, he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even death on a cross." Philippians 2:6-9. He could not go further down than this.

Then the work of Jesus was finished. In His humiliation, all sin in the flesh (which barred people from the Holy of Holies) was put to death. And when Jesus cried that it was finished, the veil of the temple was rent from top to bottom. Now the way into the sanctuary was open. The new and living way was consecrated for us; thus the way went through His flesh, which is our flesh as well. Hebrews 10:19-20. The Fall came about through disobedience, which is haughtiness. But the Fall has now been compensated for through obedience and humiliation. Hebrews 5:8-10. On this way Jesus denied Himself and took up His cross daily, and on this way e invited the great multitudes who accomphe He

He invited the great multitudes who accompanied Him to follow Him.

"Now great multitudes accompanied him; and he turned and said to them, 'If any one comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple. Whoever does not bear his own cross and come after me, cannot be my disciple.'" Luke 14:25-27. "So therefore, whoever of you does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple." Verse 33.

These are not empty words. It sounds difficult, but then we will also gain great glory, and become a partaker of it by following Him. Upon this way Jesus partook of the entire fullness of the Godhead bodily. What He is inviting us to do, as His disciples, is to partake of the fullness of the Godhead—if we will only obey Him. (Colossians 1:19, 2:2-3 and 9-10.) "Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of things not seen. For by it the men of old received divine approval." Hebrews 11:1-2.

It is impossible to get people to believe in the gospel when they have not grown tired of sin. If you find someone who is tired of sinning, then it is hopeful. Paul's commission was to lead people to the obedience of faith. If they don't come to the point of being obedient, they will not become partakers of the glory of the gospel.

Nearly everyone associates obedience with the law and the gospel with a gift ("the finished work of Calvary") that is given us by faith. "We are perfect in Him, and He is our righteousness," people say. This is an easy way out, and the multitudes follow the broad way. But what was true in Jesus will never become true in them—neither do they expect it to become true! They reckon that this will be true when they "get to heaven." Dear brother and sister: If this is your attitude of mind, then you have been deceived; everyone who does not love the truth will be deceived. Read 2 Thessalonians 2. In verses 13 and 14 we read, "But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning to be saved, through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth. To this he called you through our gospel, so that you may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ."

Jesus obtained His glory in the days of His flesh. We can also obtain this glory, but only by loving the truth. We are admonished, "So then, brethren, sand firm and hold to the traditions which you were taught by us, either by word of mouth or by letter." 2 Thessalonians 2:15. So the same thing applies to us in the days of our flesh.





Knowing Christ Jesus My Lord


"Indeed I count everything as loss because of the surpassing worth of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. For his sake I have suffered the loss of all things, and count them as refuse, in order that I may gain Christ . . . ." Philippians 3:8. Through the knowledge of Christ Paul received the gospel—the possibility of being conformed to Jesus' image, in order that Jesus "might be the firstborn among many brethren." Romans 8:29. What was the real purpose of Jesus' coming? "All this is from God, who through Christ reconciled us to himself and gave us the ministry of reconciliation; that is, in Christ God was reconciling the world to himself, not counting their trespasses against them, and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation." 2 Corinthians 5:18-19. Was reconciliation the only reason for His coming? NO, this was only the beginning of the work He actually came to do. And what work was that? It was to redeem and liberate our bodies from sin so that the entire fullness of the Godhead could dwell in us bodily. Who has ever heard such a thing! It is amazing that this is not preached, in view of how clearly it is set forth in the Scriptures. It was, in fact, for this very reason that Jesus had to come in a body like ours, a body with a flesh in which dwells nothing good.

Concerning this mystery Paul writes, ". . . how the mystery was made known to me by revelation, as I have written briefly. When you read this you can perceive my insight into the mystery of Christ, which as not made known to the sons of men in other generations, as it has now been revealed to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit; that is, how the Gentiles are fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel." Ephesians 3:3-6 and 2:12-22.

The Jews had been brought near because they had the forgiveness of sins by the law and the prescribed sacrifices, but the Gentiles had been brought near by the blood of Christ. "For he is our peace, who has made us both one, and has broken down the dividing wall of hostility, by abolishing in his flesh the law of commandments and ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man in place of the two, so making peace, and might reconcile us both to God in one body through the cross, thereby bringing the hostility to an end. And he came and preaching peace to you who were far off and peace to those who were near; for through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father." Ephesians 2:14-18.

In this passage we see what took place in Jesus' flesh and by means of His body. Both Jew and Gentile had the same flesh, but the Jews had been given the law to stop sin from coming out of the body. However, that was only a partial solution. Consequently, they were obliged to present gifts and sacrifices that could never take away sins; these could only give them forgiveness for their sins.

"For since the law has but a shadow of the good things to come instead of the true form of these realities, it can never by the same sacrifices which are continually offered year after year, make perfect those who draw near. Otherwise, would they not have ceased to be offered? If the worshipers had once been cleansed, they would no longer have any consciousness of sin. But in these sacrifices there is a reminder of sin year after year. For it is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats should take away sins." Hebrews 10:1-4.

Because of the law, which the Jews had received, a wall had arisen between Jew and Gentile. The Jews would not even eat together with the Gentiles. However, the flesh of the Jews was no better than that of the Gentiles. So when Jesus came in the flesh—a human flesh, like ours—He broke down this wall of division in His flesh. This took place because sin was condemned in the flesh and thus never entered His heart; consequently, it never came forth from His body either. And so the law was rendered superfluous. This is how He abolished the law.

With regard to Jesus' body, the law had no task to perform. On the cross Jesus created one new man in place of the two, thereby bringing the hostility to an end. Now they both have access to the Father in one Spirit. Once the disciples were baptized in this one Spirit, they could be built up as the body of Christ so that they, too, were no longer under the law. It was hard for the Jews to believe that the Gentiles were on an equal footing here, but this was the great mystery, that "the Gentiles are fellow heirs, members of the same body, and partakers of the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel." Ephesians 3:6.

The Jews criticized Peter because he had gone to Cornelius' home and baptized Gentiles there. God had to give him a vision before he could have faith to take such a step. The Jews did not understand this mystery of Christ—that by His flesh He had abolished the law. Because sin had been put to death in the flesh, there was no longer any need for the law with its commandments and ordinances.

This is also a great mystery today. Religious people speak only of the work of Calvary, about how everything was done on Calvary. They have nothing to say about the time before Jesus began His public ministry. They are primarily taken up with the signs and wonders that Jesus did and with His death on Calvary. Thus they do not know the new and living way that Jesus consecrated through His flesh into the sanctuary. They only hear about how Jesus kept the law in our stead and how He died for us, and that consequently we are now under grace. Therefore they do not experience victory over sin or enter into sanctification. Nor are they particularly grieved about it, because they are "under grace." But they really do not know what grace is. Jesus came not only with grace, but with grace and truth. John 1:17.

"Christ redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us—for it is written, 'Cursed be every one who hangs on a tree'—that in Christ Jesus the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith." Galatians 3:13-14.

Before we can experience redemption from the curse of the law, we must have come to the acknowledgment that we are in fact accursed; and we come to that acknowledgment by loving the truth. Then we partake of grace, the Spirit of truth, and thus are also made partakers of the gospel. Now we hear this exhortation: "But I say, walk by the Spirit, and do not gratify the desires of the flesh." Galatians 5:16. It is now possible for us to follow Jesus on the new and living way. Further on we read, "And those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires." Galatians 5:24.

After expressing his enthusiasm for the knowledge of Jesus Christ, Paul continues, ". . . and be found in him, not having a righteousness of my own, based on law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness from God that depends on faith." Philippians 3:9.

When religious people read this, they reckon that righteousness is a gift that is imputed to them. They never speak about "the obedience of faith," yet Paul was to bring the Gentiles to the obedience of the faith when he preached the gospel. Without the obedience of faith we have no part in the gospel at all. When Paul goes on to speak about the righteousness of God that depends on faith, he writes, "that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of his sufferings, being conformed to his death, that if possible, I might attain to the resurrection from the dead." Philippians 3:10-11.

To be a disciple of Jesus, Paul had to give up everything, and then he had to follow Jesus on the way that He had consecrated. But now he had not only his own strength (which he had under the law); now he was under grace in Christ Jesus, having come to know the power of Jesus' resurrection. Now Paul was able to follow Jesus in the fellowship of His sufferings and become like Him in His death. Now the life of Jesus could be manifested in his body. 2 Corinthians 4:10-11.





Are You Eagerly Waiting For the Hope of the Gospel?


Romans 8:25


Peter writes to the exiles of the Dispersion: ". . . chosen and destined by God the Father and sanctified by the Spirit for obedience to Jesus Christ and for sprinkling with his blood: May grace and peace be multiplied to you. Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ! By his great mercy we have been born anew to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, and to an inheritance which is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, kept in heaven for you." 1 Peter 1:1-4.

God the Father chose us, according to His foreknowledge, and sanctified us by the Spirit for obedience and sprinkling with the blood of Jesus Christ. And we know that He knew what He was doing when He chose us. The goal He had in view in choosing us was indescribably glorious. This is a great comfort when it doesn't seem to be going very well with us and we are tempted to think that it is impossible for God to do His work with us. John 15:16-17. In 1 Corinthians 1, we see just why God chose such "poor material." It as in order that we should not claim any honor for what He does with us, but that we should give Him the glory just as Abraham and Sarah did.

We read in Romans 8:24-34 that in hope we are saved. We believe in Him who chose us, and we are born-again to this hope. What we hope for, we eagerly await. If we are not eagerly awaiting the fulfillment of this hope to which we were born-again, we have lost our faith. Abraham didn't do this! The weaker he became, the stronger he grew in faith, because he gave God the glory. We must take Abraham as our example when the light shines in our lives. He who has called us is also mighty to perform it.

"We do not know how to pray as we ought, but the Spirit himself intercedes for us with sighs too deep for words." Romans 8:26. But, "We know that in everything God works for good with those who love him, who are called according to his purpose." Verse 28. In other words, our prayers are always answered. Here it is a matter of being conformed to the image of His son. We do not know everything it takes to conform us to that image: "for those whom he foreknew he also predestined to be conformed to the image of his Son," that we might become His brothers. We read further that those whom He called He also justified; and those whom He justified He also glorified. "What then shall we say to this? If God is for us, who is against us?" Nobody can hinder either God or us, provided we truly long for and eagerly await the fulfillment of our hope. He who gave His only Son for us all will also give us all things together with Him.

"Who shall bring any charge against God's elect? It is god who justifies; who is to condemn? Is it Christ Jesus, who died, yes, who was raised from the dead, who is at the right hand of God, who indeed intercedes for us?" Verses 33-34. Yes, it is dangerous indeed to accuse God's elect. God has not yet accomplished everything. He has purposed to do with all this "poor building material: He has chosen. Nevertheless, He justifies the very ones you are perhaps accusing! Jesus died for them and rose again for their sakes; He is seated at the right hand of the Father and intercedes for them. Read Colossians 3:11-15. There are many who go around thinking they understand everything so well. They are busy criticizing and accusing others and thus run the risk of forfeiting their own calling. We were not called to be accusers, but to be God's servants. Romans 6:22.

In 2 Peter 1, we read that through the knowledge of Him we have received the greatest and most precious promises, that through these we might become partakers of the divine nature. For this reason we ought to make every effort to show forth virtue in our faith. Then we will be neither unfruitful nor ineffective in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. Furthermore, the apostle exhorts us to be the more zealous to confirm our calling and election, for in so doing, we will never tumble. If we think in terms of adding virtue to our faith, we will not stumble; on the contrary, we will make our calling and election sure and gain a rich entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. That is why Peter, as long as he was alive, resolved always to remind them of these things, even though they knew them and were established in the truth.





The New Covenant


"Consequently, when Christ came into the world, he said, 'Sacrifices and offerings thou hast not desired, but a body hast thou prepared for me; in burnt offerings and sin offerings thou hast taken no pleasure. Then I said, Lo, I have come to do thy will, O God, as it is written of me in the roll of the book." When he said above, 'Thou hast neither desired nor taken pleasure in sacrifices and offerings and burnt offerings and sin offerings,' (these are offered according to the law), then he added, 'Lo, I have come to do thy will,' He abolishes the first in order to establish the second. And by that will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all." Hebrews 10:5-10.

The first covenant was but a shadow of the new. Verse 1. "A former commandment is set aside because of its weakness and uselessness (for the law made nothing perfect); on the other hand, a better hope is introduced, through which we draw near to God." Hebrews7:18-19.

The first covenant was unable to accomplish anything within the body; neither had those under this covenant given their bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which was Jesus' spiritual worship. Romans 12:1. Just what was this "spiritual worship"? It was to obey the light that God gave Him, as God condemned sin in the flesh. This, in turn, liberated His body from the sin that had always had dominion over everyone and had made it necessary to offer "sacrifices and offerings and burnt offerings and sin offerings." But god took no pleasure in all this; what pleased Him was a body that did His will.

The fact that sin was now being condemned in the flesh made these sacrifices unnecessary. Jesus did the will of God, and this was what God desired. "He abolishes the first in order to establish the second. And by that will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all." Hebrews10:9-10. "So therefore, whoever of you does not renounce all that he has cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:33. The one who becomes a disciple of Jesus has also given his body to God as a sacrifice, just as Jesus did; and by this same will our bodies also are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus once for all.

This was the life of sacrifice that Paul had embarked upon when he wrote, ". . . that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death." Philippians 3:10. Then what took place in Jesus' body also took place in Paul's body. Having been set free from sin, he had become a slave of God and had his fruit unto sanctification. Romans 6:22. Paul had entered into the new covenant that Jesus had established. He no longer had use for the sacrifices that Jesus had abolished, which God had instituted under the first covenant. Paul had entered into the second sacrifice, which Jesus established in the new covenant. This is the gospel for every one who loves God and hates sin.

The first covenant "made nothing perfect; on the other hand, a better hope is introduced through which we draw near to God." This makes Jesus the surety of a better covenant . . . Consequently he is able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him, since he always lives to make intercession for them." Read Hebrews 7:18-18.*

"Those who draw near to God through him" are the ones who become Jesus' disciples. "I appeal to you therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, to present your bodies as a living sacrifice, holy and acceptable to God, which is your spiritual worship. Do not be conformed to this world but be transformed by the renewal of your mind, that you may prove what is the will of God, what is good and acceptable and perfect." Romans 12:1-2.

That which took place in Jesus' body now takes place in ours. This is the new covenant that He established—the covenant into which we, by His finished work and by the Spirit of truth, have entered. This is the gospel that we, as disciples, are to preach; the gospel that everyone can enter into by the obedience of faith. We read previously, "Indeed, the law appoints men in their weakness as high priests, but the word of the oath, which came later than the law, appoints a Son who has been made perfect for ever." Hebrews 7:28. "Although he was a Son, he learned obedience through what he suffered; and being made perfect he became the source of eternal salvation to all who obey him." Hebrews 5:8-9.

This is the gospel. Just as He was a sacrifice and learned obedience, so His disciples also have entered into the same development. Peter writ4es, "But you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, God's own people, that you may proclaim the virtues of him who called you out of darkness into his marvelous light." 1 Peter 2:9.*

This certainly sounds attractive, and most people consider this to be God's description of us merely because we believe in Jesus. But that is a terrible religious deception. How could we ever proclaim His virtues without possessing them ourselves? And how could we ever obtain them unless the death of Jesus was at work in our bodies? It would simply be impossible. Therefore religious people usually say, "Don't look at me; look at Jesus!" When they are criticized, on account of their sin, they reply, "You mustn't judge!" This is total deception; it leads people away from the gospel. It is an attempt to turn people away from following Jesus as His disciples—quite the opposite of the commission Jesus gave His disciples before His ascension: "and Jesus came and said to them, 'All authority I heaven and on earth has been given to me. Go therefore and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, to the close of the age.'" Matthew 28:18-20.

Jesus' disciples are those who are being conformed to His image, who partake of His life and thus are able to proclaim His virtues. They become partakers of the gospel, as Paul testifies of himself: "I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me; and the life I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God, who loved me and gave himself for me." Galatians 2:20.

As we can see, he could live this life because he was crucified with Christ. Obviously he was not thinking in terms of the cross of Calvary, but in terms of the cross that Jesus said His disciples would have to take up daily if they were to follow Him. This is the gospel—in contrast to the other gospel that was preached by the Jews who wanted to put the Galatians under the law and circumcise them. Through the cross Paul could also testify, "Always carrying in the body the death of Jesus, so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our bodies." 2 Corinthians 4:10.

Because Paul had become a partaker of the gospel of Jesus Christ, he could testify, "Brethren, join in following me, and mark those who so live as you have an example in us." Philippians 3:17.* This is just the opposite of what most religious people say. But the deception had already become so widespread in Paul's time that he had to add this warning: "for many, of whom I have often told you and now tell you even with tears, live as enemies of the cross of Christ. Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things." Verses 18 and 19.

We know that they were not enemies of the cross of Calvary, but of that cross which was to have brought death to their flesh with its lusts and desires. They took comfort, I suppose in Jesus' death on Calvary. No doubt, the so-called evangelists of that day did what they do nowadays: they speak in glowing terms about the sufferings of Jesus, and with great feeling and emotion about His crucifixion. This is far from what Paul preached: "I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ who lives in me." Galatians 2:20. Therefore they cannot say as Paul said, "What you have learned and received and heard and seen in me, do; and the God of peace will be with you." Philippians 4:9. These so-called evangelists understand nothing of the new covenant or the gospel.

In the first covenant everything revolved around outward things. The law was powerless to do anything about sin in the body. The law prescribed commandments and ordinances to keep the body as much as possible from the manifestations of sin that would come forth from the flesh. And when the Israelites obeyed these commandments and ordinances, God blessed them in an earthly way. Deuteronomy 28. But only the most godfearing among them managed to be blameless before the law. Paul testified that he was blameless, but he called that his own righteousness. That was only something external. He wanted to attain to the righteousness of God, which is by faith. But then death had to be active in his body, and for this he needed the power of Jesus' resurrection. With this power the righteousness of God, which is by faith, became a reality in him through and through—with none of the hypocrisy that Jesus warned against so strongly. Philippians 3:6-10; Luke 12:1.





The Old and the New Way Into the Sanctuary


"This is he who came by water and blood, Jesus Christ, not wit the water only but with the water and the blood. And the Spirit is the witness, because the Spirit is the truth." 1 John 5:6-7. Water cleanses the body outwardly, and blood purifies the body inwardly. The blood Jesus came with was the blood of the covenant. "Now may the God of peace who brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, the great shepherd of the sheep, by the blood of the eternal covenant, equip you with everything good that you may do his will, working in you that which is pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ; to whom be glory for ever and ever. Amen." Hebrews 13:20-21.

The covenant was this: "Lo, I have come to do thy will, O God." Hebrews 10:7. "For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me . . . ." John 6:38. In order to keep this covenant, Jesus had to be sacrificed. By this sacrifice —"Not my will, but thine"—the blood was shed. This was the blood of the covenant. In the power of this blood the God of peace could raise Jesus from the dead. He came not only with water—forgiveness of sins—but with death to sin. That was the new covenant.

We read about how the high priest, in the first covenant, was to enter the sanctuary: "Then he shall kill the goat of the sin offering which is for the people, and bring its blood within the veil, and do with its blood as he did with the blood of the bull, sprinkling it upon the mercy seat and before the mercy seat; thus he shall make atonement for the holy 0place, because of the uncleannesses of the people of Israel, and because of their transgressions, all their sins; and so he shall do for the tent of meting, which abides with them in the midst of their uncleannesses." Leviticus 16:15-16.

This was the old way into the sanctuary. And in Hebrews 9:13-14, we read, "For if the sprinkling of defiled persons with the blood of goats and bulls and with the ashes of a heifer sanctifies for the purification of the flesh, how much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God." Bulls and goats had never had victory over sin, so their blood had no real power. But God prescribed these sacrifices so that the Jews would receive the forgiveness of sins. This blood "sanctifies for the purification of the flesh."

The new way went through Jesus' own flesh, where sin was put to death as He offered Himself up in the power of an eternal Spirit. The blood that flowed as a result of this sacrifice has power to purify our consciences from dead works to serve the living God. The first way into the sanctuary did not allow for any growth or development. The same sacrifices, which can never take away sins, were offered repeatedly. Hebrews 10:11. These are "dead works." Hebrews 9:14.

No one but the high priest was allowed to enter the Holy of Holies; and even he could not enter without blood. None of those who received the forgiveness of sins entered in. "By this the Holy Spirit indicates that the way into the sanctuary is not yet opened as long as the outer tent is still sanding." Hebrews 9:8.

Now we read bout the new way: "Therefore, brethren, since we have confidence to enter the sanctuary by the blood of Jesus, by the new and living way which he opened for us through the curtain, that is, his flesh . . . ." Hebrews 10:19.

As long as the veil was intact, the way was not open. We read in Matthew 27:50-52: "And Jesus cried again with a loud voice and yielded up his spirit. And behold, the curtain of the temple was torn in two, from top to bottom; and th4eearth shook, and the rocks were split; the tombs also were opened, and many bodies of the saints who had fallen asleep were raised." We read in John 19:30, "When Jesus had received the vinegar, he said, 'It is finished'; and he bowed his head and gave up his spirit."

The covenant had been kept; it had stood the test—the new and living way into the sanctuary was consecrated. A human body of the seed of David could now be raised up as the temple of the Holy Spirit. The zeal that Jesus showed in accomplishing this was vividly portrayed when He made a whip of cords and cleansed the temple from all the commercialism that went on there. When we read about it in context in John 2:13-22, we see that this has to do with the temple of the body.

We read that the new and living way through the veil into the sanctuary was consecrated for us. Jesus was our forerunner on this way, and the term forerunner here would have no meaning for us unless there wee also those who run after. Hebrews 6:19-20. What goal did He have in running this race? It was to put to death sin in the flesh, which had hindered the body from doing God's will, and to assume the entire fullness of the Godhead bodily. Colossians 1:18-20; 2:2-3 and 9:10. This is what Paul also pursued when he said, "Not that I have already obtained this or am already perfect; but I press on to make it my own, because Christ Jesus has made me his own. Brethren, I do not consider that I have made it my own; but one thing I do, forgetting what lies behind and straining forward to what lies ahead, I press on toward the goal for the prize of the upward call of God in Christ Jesus." Philippians 3:12-14.

Jesus had a true follower in Paul. And verse 10 of the same chapter tells us just how Paul followed Jesus through the veil, which was His flesh: ". . . that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death." Thus he, too, came to the blood of Jesus and had the boldness to enter the sanctuary.

Most people reckon that by the blood of Jesus we have forgiveness of sins as well as the boldness to enter into the sanctuary. However, none of those in the old covenant who received forgiveness of sins entered the sanctuary. There is no way to go if they enter in merely by virtue of Jesus' death on Calvary. The entire religious world has been deceived by such commonly used expressions. "He has done everything; we shall do nothing"; "He won salvation for us on the cross, and now we are perfect in Him"; "God sees us through the blood of Jesus as though we had never sinned"; and other such expressions that lead people astray. Those who preach such things say nothing about following Jesus, nothing about having fellowship with Him in His sufferings and nothing about carrying about His death in our bodies. Thus their listeners have not heard the gospel.

It is written that the blood of Jesus speaks more graciously than the blood of Abel; and we have come to the blood of Jesus, and to the mediator of a new covenant. Hebrews 12:24. Jesus' blood does not cry out for revenge, the way the blood of the martyrs does. Revelation 6:9-11. That is why Jesus teaches us that if we do not forgive our debtors, our heavenly Father will not forgive us our trespasses. Matthew 6:12; 14-15.





What Shall We Do in the Sanctuary?


In the Holy of Holies there were, among other things, the ark of the covenant, a golden urn holding the manna, Aaron's rod that budded, and the mercy seat. Hebrews 9:3-5.

If we are not interested in following Jesus in the new covenant, that He entered into and fulfilled, then we don't belong in the new sanctuary. Jesus was tempted ass we are in every respect, yet without sin. Therefore we can with confidence draw near to the throne of grace and receive mercy and find grace to help in time of need. Hebrews 4:15-16. In the trials we need mercy and grace so that we, too, can be without sin.

"Therefore he is also able to save to the uttermost those who draw near to God through him, since he always lives to make intercession for them." Hebrews 7:25.* "Pray at all times in the Spirit, with all prayer and supplication. To that end keep alert with all perseverance, making supplication for all the saints, and also for me, that utterance may be given me in opening my mouth boldly to proclaim the mystery of the gospel . . . ." Ephesians 6:18-19.

In these verses we see what we are to do in the sanctuary. However, it is in the blood of Jesus that we have the boldness to enter in. When we bear a grudge against someone, we cannot stand in the sanctuary before God's face as an intercessor. Nor can we stand before Him and pray for grace to help in the time of need, if we do not believe in overcoming just as He overcame.





For Whom Was This New and Living Way Consecrated?


It was consecrated for Jesus' disciples, for those who are willing to follow in His footsteps and be conformed to the image of Him who was perfected through sufferings.

This way is for those who are to be His brothers. Hebrews 2:10-11, Romans 8:28-29. "We know that all things serve to the good for those who love him, who are called according to his purpose."

We don't know what we should pray for as we need to, because we don't know what will serve to conform us to the image of the Son. However, what we do know is that what comes our way is just what we need to be conformed to His image. Romans 8:26. God knows our hearts. He knows that for us who love Him, the most precious thing is to be conformed to the image of His Son and become His brothers. That is why we know that what comes our way is what we need. It is actually what we should have prayed for. So we who believe and are Jesus' disciples will always be heard when we pray.

It is not granted to everyone to begin on the new and living way. Here we read what is required: "And since we have a great priest over the house of God, let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience and our bodies washed with pure water. Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful." Hebrews 10:21-23.

We cannot begin to walk this way while harboring doubts about our High Priest who is the surety of a new covenant. We must truly have given up everything in order to follow the Captain of our salvation, who sanctifies us, so that we can become His brothers. Hebrews 2:10-11. Nor can we begin to walk this way with a bad conscience. We must have made restitution where necessary, so that when others see us they will not be reminded of old sins we are still trying to hide. We should be in a position to apply the following words to ourselves: "And such were some of you. But you were washed, you were sanctified, you were justified in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ and in the Spirit of our God." 1 Corinthians 6:11.

This is also what Jesus teaches us in the Sermon on the Mount, which he addressed to His disciples. "He is like a man building a house, who dug deep, and laid the foundation upon rock." Luke 6:48. We cannot build o top of our old life, with that as a foundation. We must acknowledge the truth and come to the light. And once having begun, we must heed the exhortation, "Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful." Hebrews 10:23.





The Basis for Proclaiming the Gospel


The basis for proclaiming the gospel is the work the Father did in the body of Jesus as the Son of Man, in the days of His flesh. The fullness of the Godhead came to dwell in Him bodily. "Lo, I have come to do thy will, O God, as it is written of me in the roll of the book." Hebrews 10:7.

"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God." John 1:1. And in the 14th verse we read, "And the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld his glory which the only begotten has from the Father—full of grace and truth."*

"The life was made manifest, and we say it, and testify to it, and proclaim to you the eternal life which was with the Father and was made manifest to us." 1 John 1:1-4. Here we see that the disciples had seen the eternal life which was with the Father. And yet we know that not everyone had seen this life in Jesus. "But we impart a secret and hidden wisdom of God, which God decreed before the ages for our glorification. None of the rulers of this age understood this; for if they had, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory." 1 Corinthians 2:7-8.

Actually, Jesus should not have died because only those who live according to the flesh shall die. "But God shows his love for us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us." Romans 5:8. ". . . and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross." Colossians 1:20. The proof that His spirit had not been defiled by the flesh was the second part of the gospel: God raised Him from the dead. Romans 1:3-4.

"Therefore he says also in another psalm, 'Thou wilt not let thy Holy One see corruption.' For David, after he had served the counsel of God in his own generation, fell asleep, and was laid with his fathers, and saw corruption; but he whom God raised up saw no corruption. Let it be known to you therefore, brethren, that through this man forgiveness of sins is proclaimed to you, and by him every one that believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses." Acts 13:35-39.

The forgiveness of sins was obtainable by the law, but they could not attain to the righteousness of God based on faith in Christ. For that, they would have had to be able to say with Paul, ". . . that I may know him and the power of his resurrection, and may share his sufferings, becoming like him in his death." Philippians 3:9-10. That is the way of faith. The knowledge of Jesus gives us the basis upon which to preach the gospel. This was the knowledge that Paul was so enthusiastic about the knowledge for which he counted all things as dung. And he says, "According to the grace of God given to me, like a skilled master builder I laid a foundation, and another man is building upon it. Let each man take care how he builds upon it." 1 Corinthians 3:10.

As a rule, people preach only about Jesus' sufferings for us and about His death on Calvary. Consequently, they only have a foundation for the same thing they received under the law: the forgiveness of sins, which is now being preached through Jesus. But we read further that everything we could not be freed from under the law of Moses, we can now be freed from by Jesus. And just what is this? Yes, we have read much about it. "For God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do: sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh." Romans 8:3. This was the basis for faith in what follows: ". . . in order that the just requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit."

Jesus has been laid as the foundation for our faith. The law could only deal with what came forth from the body; but it was powerless to do anything about what dwelt within the body. Now, by virtue of what God did in the body of Jesus, we have a basis for believing that the same thing can take place in our body. And by believing it, we come to this: "For you have died, and your life is hid with Christ in God." Colossians 3:3.

If we read on, we see that we have a basis for putting to death our lusts and desires and putting off all sin. Further, we read how the apostles laid Jesus as the foundation for our faith. And they set no limits to what we can attain in Christ Jesus. What was once impossible, God did by sending His Son. In other words, we can be transformed and thus partake of the same life that the Son lived. If you preach the gospel you will invariably meet those who say, "Impossible!" Perhaps they have never heard the gospel, or perhaps they have never come to faith in it.





In Order to Preach the Gospel, We Must Have Experienced it Personally


"But now that you have been set free from sin and have become slaves of God, you have your fruit to sanctification and its end, eternal life." Romans 6:22.*

To be set free from sin is to have victory over conscious sin. In Galatians 5:19-21, we find a partial list of the works of the flesh, which are manifest. Everyone—saved and unsaved alike—knows that these and similar works are sin. You cannot be called a servant of God as long as you have not been set free from such sins. Paul says that such people shall not inherit the kingdom of God. Children are entitled to the inheritance. In other words, we do not become children of God by the forgiveness of sins unless we commit ourselves as disciples. Those who are led by the Spirit are the children of God. Romans 8:14-17. And those who are led by the Spirit do not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. Galatians 5:16. Those who belong to Christ have crucified the flesh with its lusts and desires. (Verse 14.)

We see that those who walk in the Spirit come to a victorious life and are qualified to be servants of God. But their development does not stop there. They have this comfort that they have a good conscience. Jesus said that the Spirit of truth would guide us into all truth. When the Spirit leads us to the sin in our flesh, we must be a sacrifice, so that we put to death the deeds of the body by the Spirit. This is the development we have as God's servants. This is sanctification, by which we partake of divine nature. If we do not have this development, after we have begun to serve God, we will regress in our spiritual life. Such "servants" usually begin to lord it over the others. We read in the book of Revelation that it had gone badly with most of the angels of the churches.

"Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful." Hebrews 10:23.

There are those who have obtained knowledge about salvation through the gospel, who are very enthusiastic about the message, and who begin to preach the gospel as though they were God's servants. But, in so doing, they go too far and make themselves out to be what they are not. Then they can lose God's grace over their lives. Many who have spiritual discernment suffer under the ministry of such people. Had these would-be servants of God loved the truth, they would instead have confessed their hope with boldness. They would have held fast their confession without wavering and would have acknowledged that they were not yet living a life of victory, as the gospel promises, but that by faith it would surely succeed for them. Then they would have been a comfort to many, and would have kept God's grace over their lives. But if they stand up and preach as though they already have victory, they will lose the grace they once received. Hebrews 4:14-16; Romans 12:3.

There is no excuse for not coming to a life of victory, because where sin abounds, grace abounds much more. How can we who were baptized into Jesus' death continue to live in sin? Likewise, how can we continue in sin, now that we are under grace and not under the law??? Romans 5:20; 6:1-3, and verse 14.





From Death to Life! From Life to Death!


1 John


"Do not wonder, brethren, that the world hates you. We know that we have passed out of death into life, because we love the brethren. He who does not love abides in death." 1 John 3:13-14.

Here we see quite clearly who has passed out of death into life, and who abides in death. If we cease to love a brother we once loved, we pass from life to death. God does not make exceptions; He does not allow us to love some brothers and not others and still abide in life. ". . . and brotherly affection with love." 2 Peter 1:1-7.

"And many false prophets will arise and lead many astray. And because wickedness is multiplied, most men's love will grow cold. But he who endures to the end will be saved." Matthew 24:11-13. Here we see that if our love grows cold on account of wicked people, we love our life in God.

"For Christ also died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit." 1 Peter 3:18. "And Jesus said, 'Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do.'" Luke 23:24. Likewise, Stephen prayed, "Lord, do not hold this sin against them." Acts 7:60.

If Jesus had come out of love, He would no longer have been in God, and salvation for all of us would thus have been lost. 1 John 4:16. And so it will be for each of us if we come out of love, for this is to come out of salvation itself. When a person proves difficult or conducts himself in such a way that another person's honor is affected—honor he feels he is entitled to—it is easy for him to give such a person a cold shoulder. He does not show care and concern for him in order to lead him to God. He does not remain in love; he fails to think about how he could help the other person. Many people think more about how the offending person can be held accountable for what he has done.

When we read Colossians 3:11-15, we see the many kinds of people whom God has chosen, and we see what we have to do in order to abide in His love. We are to forgive others just as Jesus forgave us. Then we can be built up together with them in the body of Christ and be thankful. But if we do not really understand what sanctification means to us, we will not be able to abide in love. The one who says that he has no sin deceives himself, and the truth is not in him. 1 John 1:8. If we love the truth, we will understand the exhortation in 1 Peter 1:22*: "Purify your souls in obedience to the truth unto unfeigned love of the brothers, and love one another fervently from the heart."

A cleansing process will take place among all those who are chosen by God—if we understand what sanctification is, and if we know that we have sin. Then we also have reason to be thankful that we are one body together with the others. If our love grows cold, we come out of salvation. In the love of Christ no one and nothing can lead us astray. If we read 1 Thessalonians 3:12-13, we will see that only when we abide in love will we be prepared to meet our Lord Jesus when He comes with all His saints.





The Testament


"How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through an eternal spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God. Therefore he is the mediator of a new covenant, so that those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance, since a death has occurred which redeems them from the transgressions under the first covenant. For where there is a testament, the death of the testator must of necessity be established." Hebrews 9:14-16.*

A testament documents what a person has left behind at his death, and who shall inherit the same. What then does the testament contain that Jesus has given us? It contains all that He had gained in His body. By His testament, all of this has become available to all those who believe. So what exactly did the testament contain? "He is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning, the first-born from the dead, that in everything he might be pre-eminent. For in him all the of God was pleased to dwell, and through him to reconcile to himself all things, whether on earth or in heaven, making peace by the blood of his cross." Colossians 1:18-20.

". . . that their hearts may be encouraged as they are knit together in love, to have all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." Colossians 2:2-3. "For in him the whole of the Godhead dwells bodily, and you have come to Him, who is the head of all power and authority." Verses 9-10.*

What is it then that has been given to us in Jesus' testament? No less than the fullness of the Godhead and, "all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery, of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." This is no meager inheritance! No wonder Jesus said, "Nevertheless I tell you the truth: it is to your advantage that I go away, for if I do not go away, the Counselor will not come to you; but if I go, I will send him to you." John 16:7. He says further: "I have yet many things to say to you, but you cannot bear them now. When the Spirit of truth comes, he will guide you into all truth; for he will not speak on his own authority, but whatever he hears he will speak, and he will declare to you the things that are to come. He will glorify me, for he will take what is mine and declare it to you. All that the Father has is mine; therefore I said that he will take what is mine and declare it to you." Verses 12-15.

We read that Jesus offered Himself up in the power of an eternal spirit; so this Spirit became familiar with everything that was in Christ Jesus, as well as the way to obtain it. It was also part of the testament that He would send us this Spirit to guide us on the new and living way through the veil, which was His flesh, and to show us the glory that was willed to us. Without this Spirit we would not be able to keep our bearings on "the new and living way," and would thus be unable to take possession of everything that has been willed to us. Therefore, Jesus said that the disciples were to remain in Jerusalem until they received what He had spoken of—that they would receive power when the Holy Spirit came upon them; and then they were to be His witnesses. Acts 1.

In 2 Peter, chapter 1, we read about the fulfillment of what Jesus spoke about, and of what He left us in His testament, in His will: "His divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us to is own glory and excellence, by which he has granted to us his precious and very great promises, that through these you may escape from the corruption that is in the world because of passion, and become partakers of the divine nature." Then come those glorious exhortations to partake of the virtues of Christ for which we have received all things in order to take possession of them and grow in them, and which are promised to us through the knowledge of Christ.

After Paul had heard of the Ephesians' faith in the Lord Jesus and their love for all the saints, he understood that they still lacked something. They had a foundation for receiving it, however, and so he writes, "I do not cease to give thanks for you, remembering you in my prayers, that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, may give you a spirit of wisdom and of revelation in the knowledge of him, having the eyes of your hearts enlightened, that you may know what is the hope to which he has called you, what are the riches of his glorious inheritance in the saints, and what is the immeasurable greatness of his power in us who believe, according to the working of his great might which he accomplished in Christ when he raised him from the dead and made him sit at his right hand in the heavenly places, far above all rule and authority and power and dominion, and above every name that is named, not only in this age but also in that which is to come; and he has put all things under his feet and has made him the head over all things for the church, which is his body, the of him who fills all in all." Ephesians 1:16-23.

Who, indeed, can comprehend and contain all that Paul writes about here? And who, indeed, has received this knowledge? We need the Holy Spirit to enlighten our hearts so that we can take possession of our inheritance. When Paul had called together the elders of Ephesus, he said to them, "Therefore I testify to you this day that I am innocent of the blood of all of you, for I did not shrink from declaring to you the whole counsel of god." Acts 20:26-27.

What, then, was this "whole counsel of God"? It was that the entire fullness of the Godhead was to dwell in a body that was of the seed of David. And that took place in Jesus. His resurrection was evidence that He "did not see corruption." By the knowledge of the new and living way, which Jesus consecrated, the way into the whole counsel of God is now open to us. Our inheritance is that we have received the Holy Spirit to guide us, just as Jesus had the Father to guide Him; and no limit has been set: "In him you also, who have heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him, were sealed with the promised Holy Spirit, which is the guarantee of our inheritance until we acquire possession of it, to the praise of his glory." Ephesians 1:13-14.

When Paul preached the gospel, he preached the whole counsel of God: ". . . and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God." Ephesians 3:19. And he adds, "Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think . . . ." Verse 20. The power at work within us is the love of Christ. The only thing that can hinder us in this development is a failure on our part to hold fast to the Head, "from whom the whole body nourished and knit together through its joints and ligaments, grows with a growth that is from God." Colossians 2:19.

There is no doubt whatsoever that Paul means that this is a growth we should partake of while we are in the body—just as Jesus partook of growth and development in the days of His flesh; and he says: "But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved by the Lord, because God chose you from the beginning to be saved, through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth. To this he called you through our gospel, so that you may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. So then, brethren, stand firm and hold to the traditions which you were taught by us, either by word of mouth or by letter." 2 Thessalonians 2:13-15.

Paul wrote concerning himself, ". . . that if possible I may attain the resurrection from the dead." Philippians 3:11. "I press on that I might apprehend that for which Christ Jesus has apprehended me." Verses 12:14. The way to it was open, and the possibility was there; and one thing he did, straining forward to it and proclaiming it, for his gospel came to them "not only in word, but also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with full conviction. You know what kind of men we proved to be among you for your sake. And you became imitators of us and of the Lord." 1 Thessalonians 1:5-6.

"Yes, but," you say, "don't we receive all this as a gift when we receive the inheritance?" Then we must say, like Paul, "I want you to know, brethren, that our fathers were all under the cloud, and all passed through the sea, and all were baptized into Moses in the cloud and in the sea . . . ." 1 Corinthians 10:1-12. In these verses you can read how most of them acted. They only wanted to eat and drink and play. They were not worthy to receive the inheritance.

They had all received the Promised Land, which flowed with milk and honey, as an inheritance from their forefathers—Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and their seed. They went up to take possession of it, and we know what happened. They drew near, but they did not have faith to take up the battle against the enemy in the land. They became opposers of Joshua and Caleb, who had faith. This teaches us how receptive people are to the voice of unbelief and how difficult it is to lead them to faith. They are not willing to suffer; they are not willing to fight the good fight of faith and lay hold of eternal life. 1 Timothy 6:12. And that is just how it is today with the religious masses. Read Numbers 13:16-33 and chapter 14. These passages of Scripture are very instructive.

If God had sent a pestilence into the land beforehand, so that all the giants were lying dead when the Israelites came, they would then have said the same thing we normally hear preached today: "God has fought for us; He has done everything, and we shall do nothing." Then there would have been rejoicing in the camp. But what sort of education would they have received? They would not have come to know God—the God who caused the sun to stand still and gave the people victory.

The Israelites believed only in their own strength—so of course they weren't able to take the land. But Joshua and Caleb believed God, which is why they had God's good pleasure over them and could take the enemy like a peace of bread. During the years spent in the wilderness, Joshua and Caleb had come to know God through all the miracles they had witnessed. This was not true of the others, who had to turn back to the wilderness again. Moses had prayed that God might forgive them, and God did; but they did not enter the Promised Land.

There in the wilderness God gave them the brass serpent that they could look upon and thus save their lives when bitten by snakes. And so it is with the religious masses today. They speak about Jesus as if He were a brass serpent, as One they can look upon and so receive forgiveness of sins. John 3:14-16. We do preach the forgiveness of sin through Jesus, but we preach the gospel as well—that which the law could not led us to. Acts 13:38-39.

By the blood of Jesus we draw near, just as Israel drew near. "[And you] he has now reconciled in his body of flesh by his death, in order to present you holy and blameless and irreproachable before him, provided that you continue in the faith, stable and steadfast, not shifting from the hope of the gospel which you heard . . . ." Colossians 1:22-23. For this to continue to take place, sin in the flesh must be put to death, as we read in Ephesians 2:13-18. ". . . even as he chose us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and blameless before him. . . ." Ephesians 1:4-6.

Here it is not a question of being irreproachable according to the law, for then we are standing before man. Paul had attained to that before Jesus met him. Now it is a matter of being irreproachable and blameless before God's face. For this to be true, the enemy must be put to death in the body. We cannot merely receive Jesus s a brass serpent—a sin offering; we must also receive Him as Lord and High Priest. In so doing we experience a far greater salvation: being conformed to the image of God's Son, that we may become His brothers. Romans 5:10, 14:9; Colossians 2:6.

". . . and all drank the same spiritual drink. For they drank from that spiritual Rock which followed them, and that Rock was Christ." 1 Corinthians 10:4.* This is an instructive lesson and an example for us. "Behold, I will stand before you there on the rock at Horeb; and you shall strike the rock, and water shall come out of it, that the people may drink.' And Moses did so, in the sight of the elders of Israel." Exodus 17:6. Jesus was stricken; He had to die, the Just for the unjust, so that we could receive the forgiveness of sins. But we read further how Moses was to inspire them to become conquerors:

"And the Lord said to Moses, 'Take the rod, and assemble the congregation, you and Aaron your brother, and tell the rock before their eyes to yield its water; so you shall bring water out of the rock; so you shall give drink to the congregation and their cattle.' And Moses took the rod from before the Lord, as he commanded him. And Moses and Aaron gathered the assembly together before the rock, and he said to them, 'Hear now, you rebels; shall we bring forth water for you out of this rock?' And Moses lifted up his hand and struck the rock with his rod twice; and water came forth abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their cattle. And the Lord said to Moses and Aaron, 'Because you did not believe in me, to sanctify me in the eyes of the people of Israel, therefore you shall not bring this assembly into the land which I have given them.'" Numbers 20:7-12.

We learn from this that we are not always to "strike the rock"—which is to have Jesus as a sin offering. Jesus rose from the dead as Lord. We must receive Him as Lord and High Priest. Then ". . . much more now that we are reconciled, shall we be saved by his life." Romans 5:10. So, after we have been reconciled to god by the forgiveness of sins, we must come into such a relationship with Him that we can speak to Him as Hid disciples. Romans 4:24-25; 5:10. Then we come into a relationship of obedience. Hebrews 5:9-14. We receive grace to enter the promised land—putting sin in the flesh to death—and to take possession of our inheritance.

However, we must not let ourselves be moved from the hope of the gospel, like Israel did when they had drawn near and beheld the enemy in the land. Since then we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus, the Son of God, let us hold fast our confession." Hebrews 4:14. This was the spirit that Joshua and Caleb had received, and the entered the land.

When people hear the gospel about salvation in the body and about the inheritance, the say, "Impossible!" They have not come to faith in Jesus as their surety, their High Priest and lord. They only reckon with their own strength, like Israel did, and they end up wandering in the wilderness, with no growth and development and no possibility of obtaining the inheritance.

We are called to partake of a tried faith through the "obedience of faith." "In this you rejoice, though now for a little while you may have to suffer various trials, so that the genuineness of your faith, more precious than gold which though perishable is tested by fire, may redound to praise and glory and honor at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 1 Peter 1:6-7. By this faith we take possession of the inheritance.





Simple Faith


2 Corinthians 11:2-3


"But I am afraid that as the serpent deceived Eve by his cunning, so your thoughts will be corrupted and led astray from the simple faith toward Christ."*

Eve was so childlike that she had no thoughts about the tree of which she was forbidden to eat. She had not even seen it. Only when the serpent began to talk about the tree were her thoughts corrupted and led astray from the simple faith.

"I warn every one who hears the words of the prophecy of this book: if any one adds to them, God will add t him the plagues described in this book, and if any one takes away from the words of the book of this prophecy, God will take away his share in the tree of life and in the holy city, which are described in this book." Revelation 22:18-19.

It is written about the Antichrist, "[He] who opposes and exalts himself against every so-called god or object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God." 2 Thessalonians 2:4. He does the opposite of what Jesus did (Philippians 2:5-9) and deceives people by explaining away Jesus' humiliation.

We read that Jesus, when He was in the form of God, emptied Himself and took the form of a servant. And being found in human form, He humbled Himself. Those who are simple in their faith believe this just as it is written. The spirit of Antichrist, on the other hand, explains that all this took place on the cross when Jesus died for our sins.

If, for example, we read that according to the flesh Jesus came of the seed of David, the spirit of Antichrist begins to explain that Jesus did not have sin in the flesh like David had. Those who are simple in their faith, believe just what is written in Romans 1:3. And if we red that God condemned sin in the flesh, the spirit of Antichrist explains that sin was not in Jesus' flesh, but only in the flesh of man. Thus many who began by believing what is written have had their thoughts led astray from that simple faith.

If we read to them Hebrews 2:14-18, "Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same nature," they begin to explain that this was not the kind of flesh we have, but the kind that Adam had before the fall. "No, He was not tempted like we are; He was not so 'low'! He was tempted like Adam before the fall," they say. Read Hebrews 4:14-16. We could go on reading about Jesus' humiliation. But the Serpent explains it all away, and many people's thoughts are led astray from reading the Bible just as it is written. At Bible schools they are in the Serpent's service. They have many different interpretations of God's Word in order to find the easiest way, so that they can gather many people. 2 Corinthians 2:17.

They take away from God's Word and they add to it, and people end up with another Jesus and another gospel; and they submit to it readily enough! 2 Corinthians 11:4. John writes that we can discern the spirit of the Antichrist because it does not confess that Jesus has come in the flesh. 1 John 4:1-3; 2 John 7-8.

When you are reading God's Word in all simplicity and without thinking that it might have some other meaning, and someone starts interpreting and explaining it, then it is the Serpent that has come to you as he came to Eve. "Beware!" the Serpent is especially active at bible schools. This is a very serious mater. Read 2 Thessalonians 2:11-12 and 2 Peter 1:20-21 in particular.

Jesus says, "Think not that I have come to abolish the law and the prophets; I have come not to abolish them but to fulfill them." Matthew 5:17.

Religious people are in agreement with that, and they say, "Jesus did this in our stead." But they all agree that there are two commandments that Jesus did not fulfi8ll in our stead. The one is to give a tithe. They feel we must still tithe. They even write whole books on the subject. They quote verses such as Matthew 23:23, "Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! For you tithe mint and dill and cummin, and have neglected the weightier matters of the law, justice and mercy and faith; these you ought to have done, without neglecting the others."

"Without neglecting the others," it says. In other words, these religious people believe we must continue to tithe. In response to this claim, we would have to say in accordance with what is written, ". . . that we may no longer be children, tossed to and fro and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the cunning of men, by their craftiness in deceitful wiles." Ephesians 4:14. The fact is, Jesus was speaking to people who were under the law. Matthew 23:2-3.

Jesus fulfilled the law—not in our stead, but in order that we might follow Him in His steps. What are His steps? Just this: that we give ourselves as a sacrifice. Jesus didn't just give a tenth; He gave everything. This was also what He preached when He called His disciples: "So therefore, whoever of you does not renounce all that he has cannot be y disciple." Luke 14:33. Paul puts it this way: "I do it all for the sake of the gospel." 1 Corinthians 9:23.

If church leaders were to preach this, and give freedom to their congregations in money matters, they know from experience that not much money would come in. So they make tithing a matter of conscience. We would have to call this "craftiness in deceitful wiles."

The other commandment concerns the Sabbath. Religious leaders make use of many Old Testament scriptures. In those days the people were very exact about keeping the Sabbath. This was the one day of the week when they were not supposed to do their own work. They were to call the Sabbath a delight, "not going your own ways, or seeking your own pleasure, or talking idly." Isaiah 58:13.

They had this commandment under the law, and it was difficult to keep. It was not Jesus' intention to abolish this commandment, but to fulfill it. The same thing applies here as with the commandment concerning tithing. Jesus came to make every day holy. He never did His own will; He never spoke idly. "For I have come down from heaven, not to do my own will, but the will of him who sent me." John 6:38. He fulfilled the law not only on one day of the week but every day—and at all times of the day and night!

And so it will be for us who are His disciples.





The Disciple and Imputed Righteousness


"Go therefor and make disciples of all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, to the close of the age." Matthew 28:19-20. "If any one comes to me and does not hate his own father and mother and wife and children and brothers and sisters, yes, and even his own life, he cannot be my disciple." Luke 14:26.

Here we see the commission the apostles received from Jesus. It was not merely to come to "the foot of the cross", as we are invited to do in many hymns and by many so-called evangelists—there to unload our burden of sin. If people do this, they are reckoned to be born-again Christians. However, Jesus' invitation to follow Him implied much more; it had a deeper content, which the apostles were to teach to people when they invited them to come to Jesus. They were to make disciples of them.

Jesus spoke in such a way that many had come to faith in Him. "Jesus then said to the Jews who had believed in him, 'If you continue in my word, you are truly my disciples, and you will know the truth, and the truth will make you free . . . .'" John 8:30-36. We know what happened afterwards. When He tried to make disciples of them, they began to hate Him. It is just the same today. Many of those who call themselves Christians and believe they are born-again would become the evangelist's enemies if he were to try to make disciples of them. But he is not interested in such a task anyway. He wants a reputation for starting great revivals, but he is not willing to run the risk that the multitudes might become enemies and go their way.

Of course, these so-called evangelists are not disciples themselves, nor are they born-again. Paul said, even in his day, "For we re not, like so many, peddlers of God's word; but as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God, in the sight of God we speak in Christ." 2 Corinthians 2:17.

"Of his own will he brought us forth by the word of truth that we should be a kind of first fruits of his creatures." James 1:18. Here we see that we are born-again by the word of truth, and this is what Jesus said: "And you will know the truth, and the truth will make you free." His listeners would not acknowledge that they were in bondage, but Jesus explained to them, "Truly, truly, I say to you, every one who commits sin is a slave to sin."

The one who does not love the truth cannot be truly free, nor can he partake of sanctification by the Spirit and gain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. The apostle writes, "therefore God sends upon them a strong delusion, to make them believe what is false, so that all may be condemned who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness . . . ." 2 Thessalonians 2:11-14.

It is true what Jesus and the apostles wrote and said, that many deceivers would arise who live in sin; ". . . lovers of pleasure rather than lovers of God, holding the form of religion but denying the power of it. Avoid such people . . . ." 2 Timothy 3:1-8. It is those who love the truth and who want to be set free from sin who become born-again. They receive power to hate their own life and become Jesus' disciples.

"For what does the scripture say? 'Abraham believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness.' Now to one who works, his wages are not reckoned as a gift but as his due." Romans 4:3-4. This is a glorious scripture for all those who do not want to be obedient to the gospel, who believe that our works count for nothing, and that only faith in Jesus counts for anything. Then they reckon that Jesus' righteousness is imputed to us, that God sees us through Jesus as though we were righteous. Millions of people are living in this deception.

When Abraham believed God, he believed the promise God had given, and then Abraham waited for its fulfillment. He received a tried faith which has been praised by both God and man. "He received circumcision as a sign or seal of the righteousness which he had by faith while he was still uncircumcised. The purpose was to make him the father of all who believe without being circumcised and who thus have righteousness reckoned to them, and likewise the father of the circumcised who are not merely circumcised but also follow the example of the faith which our father Abraham had before he was circumcised." Romans 4:11-12.

Abraham was led by faith in God, and he left behind steps of faith. Thus he entered into the obedience of faith, the same obedience which Paul was to bring about among all the Gentiles, and for which he had received his apostleship. Because Abraham was obedient and walked by faith, he obtained the promise. This means that when we believe in Jesus we also have the promise that he shall complete a work in us. Philippians 1:6. "Let us hold fast the confession of our hope without wavering, for he who promised is faithful." Hebrews 10:23.

When an apprentice begins his apprenticeship, he can be regarded as though he were already like his master—provided the apprentice is faithful and does not give up. All the master's knowledge and skills are imputed to the apprentice from the first day, when the contract of apprenticeship is signed. And what is this apprenticeship contract? It is just what is written: "Do you not know that all of us who have been baptized into Christ Jesus were baptized into his death? We were buried therefore with him by baptism into death, so that as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, we too might walk in newness of life. For if we have been united with him in a death like his, we shall certainly be united with him in a resurrection like his." Romans 6:3-5.

This was also what Jesus was speaking about when He said that we are to make disciples of all the nations, ". . . baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you." Matthew 28:19-20. After signing their contract of apprenticeship, they can begin to be taught. Many assemblies are eager to get their new converts baptized, because then they can enter their names on the membership rolls. But there are very few who realize that baptism is actually a contract of apprenticeship, and that afterwards they are to be taught to observe everything Jesus has commanded.

It is not possible to baptize into death anyone who does not hate his own life. It would only be putting on a show. "[And you] he has now reconciled in his body of flesh by his death, in order to present you holy and blameless and irreproachable before him." Colossians 1:22. This was that good work which God had begun in the Colossians, which Paul was certain, the Lord would complete. But this was under the provision that we ". . . continue in the faith, stable and steadfast, not shifting from the hope of the gospel." Verse 23. Then the work would be complete.





Imputed Righteousness


"For the love of Christ constrains us, because we are convinced that one has died for all; therefore all have died. And he died for all, that those who live might no longer live for themselves, but for him who both died and was raised for them." 2 Corinthians 5:14-15.*

Here we see Paul's reasoning. When we become disciples, we have the same hatred for our own life according to the flesh that Jesus demonstrated in the temple, where He spoke abut how He would raise up the temple again in three days. John chapter 2. It was the same with the battle He fought in Edom, which we read about in Isaiah 63. Then a day of vengeance was in His heart. His battle in "the flesh of David" was to destroy the lusts and desires, so that the body could be built up as the temple of the Holy Spirit. Then there would be peace in the body, peace in which to pray and listen. 1 Corinthians 6:19-20.

The death which took place in Jesus' body, and the fullness which came to dwell there in the days of His flesh, is imputed to His disciple when he signs the contract. This is the imputed righteousness on the basis of faith in Christ Jesus as High Priest and Lord.

We read in Romans 7:4-6: "Likewise, my brethren, you have died to the law through the body of Christ, so that you may belong to another, to him who has been raised from the dead in order that we may bear fruit for God. While we were living in the flesh, our sinful passions, aroused by the law, were at work in our members to bear fruit for death. But now we are discharged from the law, dead to that which held us captive, so that we serve not under the old written code but in the new life of the Spirit."

Here we see again that what took place through the body of Jesus is imputed to us—but only if we continue to hate the lusts and desires of the flesh. Then we serve in the newness of the Spirit. This was a new ministry that Jesus introduced. He lived before the Father's face. He lived in "the obedience of faith", something neither His mother nor His brothers and sisters after the flesh could understand. And when he began His ministry, they thought He was beside Himself. Mark 3:21. "For you have died, and your life is hid with Christ in God." Colossians 3:3. Such people seek the things that are above, not the things that are on earth.

When we, like Jesus, serve in the newness of the Spirit, then what the Spirit shows us of what comes forth from our body—our nature—will be put to death, because we were baptized into His death. Romans 8:13-14. This is the disciple's growth and development. What was imputed to him by virtue of the finished work of Christ Jesus will thus be carried out in Him. Hebrews 9:14. And the apostle writes, "The death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God. Do you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, to make you obey their passions. Do not yield your members to sin as instruments of wickedness, but yield yourselves to God as men who have been brought from death to life, and your members to God as instruments of righteousness. For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace." Romans 6:10-14.

What do you hear when you read this? Do you hear the law when you hear these exhortations? If so, you have not heard the gospel. We read, "For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace." Surely, to be under grace is not to be under the law, is it? No, it was Jesus who came with grace and truth, which is the gospel; Moses came with the law. However, because you have been led to believe in a false grace, a grace without truth, the workings of grace have become like law for you. Jude 3-5. "By Silvanus, a faithful brother as I regard him, I have written briefly to you, exhorting and declaring that this is the true grace of God; stand fast in it." 1 Peter 5:12.

Grace had become so falsified already in those days that Peter took Silvanus as witness in declaring that they were in the true grace. And, since it was all by grace, it was our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ who received the honor. Those who seek their own honor are not in God's grace. 2 Peter 3:17-18.

Here we see that exhortations are a part of true grace. The apostle continues to write in his second epistle to those ". . . who have obtained a faith of equal standing with ours in the righteousness of our god and Savior Jesus Christ." We read further, "May grace and peace be multiplied to you in the knowledge of God and of Jesus our Lord." Then he goes on to clarify for them: "His divine power has granted to us all things that pertain to life and godliness, through the knowledge of him who called us to his own glory and excellence, by which he has granted to us his precious and very great promises, that through these you may escape from the corruption that is in the world because of passion, and become partakers of the divine nature."

Most Christians believe that divine nature is something we will have only when we get to heaven. But the apostle states clearly that it was by escaping ". . . from the corruption that is in the world because of passion . . . ." "For this very reason be diligent to show forth virtue in your faith . . . ."

Because they were in the true grace, he could continue to exhort them, and he intended to keep on doing so as long as he was in the body, even though they knew these things and were established in them. 2 Peter 1:1 flg.

Most people, when they hear an exhortation, say, "We can do nothing." They are quoting Jesus, which makes them feel like they are on solid ground. But just as most people twist God's Word to make it suit them, these people twist the words of Jesus. What did He really say? "I am the vine, you are the branches. He who abides in me, and I in him, he it is that bears much fruit, for apart from me you can do nothing." John 15:5.

So when they say, "we can do nothing", they are actually saying they are outside of Him. Consequently, they are neither His disciples, nor are they members on the body of Christ.





The Body of Christ


"For just as the body is one and has many members, and all the members of the body, though many, are one body, so it is with Christ. For by one Spirit we were all baptized into one body—Jews or Greeks, slave or free—and all were made to drink of one Spirit." 1 Corinthians 12:12-13.

This one Spirit is the Spirit in which Jesus offered Himself. Hebrews 9:14. All those who have been baptized by this one Spirit are disciples and members of the body of Jesus Christ—or, as Jesus put it, branches in Him who is the true Vine. Thus it would be absurd to say that they could do nothing. Jesus said, "He it is that bears much fruit." John 15:5.

Jesus is also described as being the Head of the body, and we read what kind of content the Head has: "He is the head of the body, the church; he is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead, that in everything he might be pre-eminent. For in him all the fullness of God was pleased to dwell." Colossians 1:18-19.

If He Himself is pre-eminent, this means that all the members of His body are eminent. We read further, ". . . that their hearts may be encouraged as they are knit together in love, to have all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery, Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge . . . For in him the whole fullness of deity dwells bodily, and you have come to fullness of life in him, who is the head of all rule and authority." Colossians2:2-3 and 9-10. You can read in Ephesians 1:19-23 about the kind of Head that has been given to the church, ". . . which is his body, the fullness of him who fills all in all."

It is quite clear from these scriptures what the body is filled with, just as Paul preached: ". . . and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God." Ephesians 3:19. This development is the sanctification and growth of the disciples. Thus, having been set free from sin, they have become servants of God, and have their fruit unto sanctification. Romans 6:22.

Jesus appointed in the church such servants as could help the saints—those who were disciples—to row and be perfected in their work of ministry, to the edification of the body. Ephesians 4:11-13. We see further how the development of the disciples progresses, ". . . until we all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, to mature manhood, to the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ." The disciples have this growth until they "all attain to the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God."

We cannot have a greater education than to be perfected in the work of ministry, to the edification of the body of Christ. We receive this education when the death of Jesus is active in our body. Then we also understand the importance of serving the other members of the body. We cannot serve in the church unless Jesus' death is working in our own body.

If it is true, that it is working, how can there be division among the believers? There can't be, if we believe the gospel! "Is Christ divided?" All the Corinthians understood that this was not so; nevertheless, they quarreled among themselves. If Paul, Cephas, and Apollos had sought their own, then three factions would soon have arisen. 1 Corinthians 1:10-15. But the three of them were servants of Jesus and were able to help the saints to come into the growth and development that we have read about.

The Corinthians were still carnal, infants in Christ. Yet in the same chapter Paul thanked God for the grace that had been given to them in Jesus Christ, for in Him they had become enriched with all doctrine and all knowledge and every spiritual gift, and they were waiting for the revelation of Jesus Christ. Clearly, Paul, Cephas, and Apollos were one. See Chapter 3. They themselves had become what the others were to become—and they were to help them to that end. Consequently, it was impossible for divisions—three factions—to develop. As servants in the church and members of the same body, their ministries varied, yet they were one and reckoned themselves as nothing. Only God, who gave the growth, was anything. Verses 5-9.

All the different religious denominations have nothing to do with the body of Christ, even though they explain and twist everything to make it appear biblical. When they explain something, you should ask, "Where is that written?" You will soon notice that if they do reply by quoting Scripture, they nevertheless quickly set out to explain it away. They don't accept it as it is written, but interpret it falsely, as Peter writes: "And count the longsuffering of our Lord as salvation. So also our beloved brother Paul wrote to you according to the wisdom given him, speaking of this as he does in all his letters. There are some things in them hard to understand, which the ignorant and unstable interpret falsely, as they do the other scriptures." 2 Peter 3:15-16.*

Peter and Paul were one. No matter how wretched the saints were in the beginning, Peter and Paul could serve them. There was no division. There were, however, many to whom these words of Jesus apply: "If a man does not abide in me, he is cast forth as a branch and withers; and the branches are gathered, thrown into the fir and burned." John 15:6.

It is fairly obvious that none of these religious assemblies have ever really heard the gospel. They believe the gospel to be nothing more than the forgiveness of sins, and that the life of Jesus lived will be imputed to them without partaking of it personally, because they believe it is something they will receive in heaven.

It is quite apparent that despite everything these religious people say about being a disciple, about Jesus being the Head, the church being His body, and we being God's children, they are just phrases they use which have nothing to do with the gospel. For them, only the message about forgiveness of sins is of any importance. If you speak the truth to them, they reply: "You must not judge." But those who love the truth experience the truth and the fulfillment of Jesus' prayer, "that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, are in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that thou hast sent me. The glory which thou hast given me I have given to them, that they may be one even as we are one, I in them and thou in me, that they may become perfectly one, so that the world may know that thou hast sent me and hast loved them even as thou hast loved me." John 17:21-23. Verses 7 and 8 tell us that the glory, which the Father gave Jesus and which Jesus gave His disciples, was God's Word. Unless we keep God's Word there will be no glory, nor can we be one with the Father and the Son.

This, then, is how we ought to do our missionary work. Every kind of work that has a form of godliness, without the power to conquer sin so that the believers can become one, is just a deception. 2 Timothy 3:1-5.

There are a number of scriptures where the words likewise, even as, and so, are used when speaking about Jesus and about us. In John 17 we see this in several places, e.g.: "As thou didst send me into the world, so I have sent them into the world." Verse 18. This is particularly fitting when we think of Jesus as Lord and Master and ourselves as His apprentices. Then these will not be merely empty words, but the truth. Then we are in the new covenant: "Lo, I have come to do thy will, O God,' as it is written of me." Hebrews 10:7. And the Word also becomes flesh in us, just as it became flesh in Him, as long as God's grace is over us for our own education and for carrying out His work in the world. When the time of grace is over, the rapture will come.

"But as to the times and the seasons, brethren, you have no need to have anything written to you. For you yourselves know well that the day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night . . . ." 1 Thessalonians 5:1-11. Since He is coming like a thief, you would have thought we needed to know the day and the hour. But Jesus' disciples don't need to know because they do what is written: "therefore, my beloved, as you have always obeyed, so now, not only as in my presence but much more in my absence, work out your own salvation with fear and trembling; for God is at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure. Do all things without grumbling or questioning." Philippians 2:12-14.

"Beloved, we are God's children now; it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every one who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure." 1 John 3:2-3. This is precisely what Jesus' disciples are doing whether the time of His return is close at hand or far off; in fact, this is the only way for us to live. However, there are varying degrees of zeal and seriousness. We read about working out our salvation "with fear and trembling." "Therefore let us be grateful for receiving a kingdom that cannot be shaken, and thus let us offer to God acceptable worship, with reverence and awe; for our God is a consuming fire." Hebrews 12:28-29.

We don't hear such things among religious people, and that is why they are so keen on calculating the time for Jesus' return. But, because of the doctrine they have, they have no chance of preparing for it. After all, "Jesus has done everything," as they say, and "we shall do nothing." They are all "perfect in Him." We read that Christ ". . . has entered not into a sanctuary made with hands, a copy of the true one, but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf . . . And just as it is appointed for men to die once, and after that comes judgment, so Christ, having been offered once to bear the sins of many, will appear a second time, not to deal with sin, but to save those who are eagerly waiting for him." Hebrews 9:24-28.

This passage makes it clear that He is not coming the second time the way He came the first time. The first time, He came to take away the sins of many. The second time, He will be coming to take those who are the product of His first coming. In the book of Revelation it is written, "Let us rejoice and exult and give him the glory, for the marriage of the Lamb has come, and his Bride has made herself ready." Revelation 19:7.

"But you are not in darkness, brethren, for that day to surprise you like a thief . . . So then let us not sleep, as others do, but let us keep awake and be sober . . . but, since we belong to the day, let us be sober, and put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for a helmet the hope of salvation. For God has not destined us for wrath, but to obtain salvation through our Lord Jesus Christ, who died for us so that whether we wake o5r sleep we might live with him." 1 Thessalonians 5:4-10. And Paul continues, "Therefore encourage one another and build one another up, just s you are doing." Verse 11.

Jesus' disciples have a glorious calling—a "heavenly calling." "But if we judged ourselves truly, we should not be judged. But when we are judged by the Lord, we are chastened so that we may not be condemned along with the world." 1 Corinthians 11:31-32. "For the time has come for judgment to begin with the household of God; and if it begins with us, what will be the end of those who do not obey the gospel of God? And 'If the righteous man is scarcely saved, where will the ungodly and sinner appear?'" 1 Peter 4:17-18.*

The righteous man is the one who judges himself. He is among those who, like living stones, are built into a spiritual house. 1 Peter 2:5. Such souls love the truth and will not be condemned together with the world. This is our heavenly calling. But all those who, when they hear the truth, say, "Judge not!" are among the ungodly; for whom God's wrath is appointed. "Or do you presume upon the riches of his kindness and forbearance and patience? Do you not know that God's kindness is meant to lead you to repentance? But by your hard and impenitent heart you are storing up wrath for yourself on the day of wrath when God's righteous judgment will be revealed. For he will render to every man according to his works." Romans 2:4-6.

From the above we understand that when the time of grace is over, the church—the body of Christ—will have nothing more to do on earth. Then will come the rapture and the marriage of the Lamb. All those bodies in whom the death of Christ has been active and the life of Christ has been revealed will be raptured.





Divine Nature


The gospel gives us the hope of partaking of divine nature while we are in our earthly body. Jesus consecrated this way while here on earth in a body of the seed of David. And the knowledge of Him gives us this hope.

"If then you have been raised with Christ, seek the things that are above, where Christ is, seated at the right hand of God. Set your minds on things that are above, not on things that are on earth. For you have died, and your life is hid with Christ in God." Colossians 3:1-3. The apostle is referring to baptism here, which is mentioned in chapter 2:11-12.

"See what love the Father has given us, that we should be called children of God; and so we are. The reason why the world does not know us is that it did not know him." 1 John 3:1.

As God's children we live by faith and not by our reasoning. Jesus' own family couldn't understand Him either. Mark 3:21. Those under the law had earthly promises. And they had to believe in God's blessing in order for it to remain over them; but all this was temporal and visible. Deuteronomy 15:7-11. We, on the other hand, have a heavenly calling; and we are exhorted to consider Jesus, the apostle and high priest of our confession, and the pioneer and perfecter of our faith. Hebrews 3:1 and 12:2.

The Colossians were baptized—they had signed their contract of apprenticeship, as it were—and had been raised to newness of life, the life that Jesus lived. They were exhorted to seek those things that are above, and not the praise and honor of man. By the law and the ritual sacrifices the people living in the old covenant were cleansed for the purifying of the flesh; that was the cleansing of the water. But Jesus offered Himself through the eternal Spirit. Hebrews 9:13-14. He says, "for I have come down from heaven, not to do my will, but the will of him who sent me." John 6:38. This was an inner, hidden sacrifice in which the blood of the covenant came forth. And the Spirit bore witness, because the Spirit is the truth. 1 John 5:6-10. In this sacrifice there was no honor of man; rather, it was God Himself who bore witness.

"If we receive the testimony of men, the testimony of God is greater; for this is the testimony of God that he has borne witness to his Son. He who believes in the Son of God has the testimony in himself. He who does not believe God has made him a liar, because he has not believed in the testimony that God has borne to his Son." 1 John 5:9-10. We know how much the testimony of men means to people. That is why they live an outward life and struggle to keep up a good appearance. They think very little about the hidden sacrifice, which would give them the testimony which God witnessed concerning His Son. Such people are not God's children. They are not born again, and in all their sacrificing they never partake of divine nature. Such souls are always in bondage.

"For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God. For you did not receive the spirit of slavery to fall back into fear, but you have received the spirit of sonship. When we cry, 'Abba! Father!" it is the Spirit himself bearing witness with our spirit that we are children of God." Romans 8:14-16.

When we have it like this, we have come to the sacrifice of Jesus: "Not my will but thine be done." Then we have the testimony of the water, the blood, and the Spirit. This is the hidden life with Christ in God, and we have the testimony, which God has witnessed concerning His Son. In this hidden sacrifice we come to divine nature. Then the death of Jesus is active in our bodies, and the life of Jesus is manifested in our mortal flesh. The Hebrews had not obtained the testimony of the blood, which is why they had not grown spiritually. Hebrews 12:4 and 5:11-13.

"When Christ who is our life appears, then you also will appear with him in glory." Colossians 3:4. This must be sufficient for us. We read further about "putting off" and "putting to death." We cannot give the kind of exhortations that follow to anyone other than disciples, to those who are born again: "The death he died he died to sin, once for all, but the life he lives he lives to God. So you also must consider yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, to make you obey their passions." Romans 6:10-12.

"Alive to God in Christ Jesus," it said. You will never partake of divine nature if you are not alive to God; you will not have the witness of the Spirit with your spirit that you are a child of God. We read, "How much more shall the blood of Christ, who through the eternal Spirit offered himself without blemish to God, purify your conscience from dead works to serve the living God." Hebrews 9:14. "But now that you have been set free from sin and have become servants of God, you have your fruit unto sanctification and its end, eternal life." Romans 6:22.*

What are "dead works"? They are good works that I do in order to please God; but when I receive honor for doing them, they do not result in sanctification, and so they become dead works. Nothing those under the law struggled to do resulted in sanctification. You can read about that in Matthew 23 in the parable about the Pharisee in the temple. The Pharisees boasted about what they did and sought the testimony of men. They were not living before God. And so it is today with most religious workers and their work. No inward sacrificing takes place that would make them spiritual and enable them to bring others to the life that Jesus prayed about: ". . . that they may all be one; even as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be in us, so that the world may believe that thou hast sent me." John 17:21. Of what value is all this work when Jesus" prayer is not answered? They have ". . . a form of godliness but deny the power of it. Avoid such people." 2 Timothy 3:5.*

What was the result of Jesus doing the Father's will? It was simply this: "He who has seen me has seen the Father." John 14:9. By doing God's will, the fullness of the Father came to dwell in Him. The Word was the Father, and the Word became flesh and dwelt among us, and we beheld His glory. Our consciences are to be cleansed from dead works, which are commandments and ordinances. When our conscience tells us to do these things the result is bondage—dead works. It is written of Jesus, ". . . by abolishing in his flesh the law of commandments and ordinances, that he might create in himself one new man in place of the two, so making peace." Ephesians 2:15. One does not become a new man by doing dead works, though one might possibly have many things to boast of. By becoming servants of God and serving Him, we have our fruit unto sanctification. Then we truly become "a new man," and our works become living.

Jesus gives us a strong warning and a powerful word of exhortation: "Beware of practicing your piety before men in order to be seen by them; for then you will have no reward from your Father who is in heaven." Matthew 6:1. Imagine that! They actually sounded the trumpet when they gave alms. Jesus calls such people hypocrites. Everyone who serves with eyeservice is a hypocrite. Divine nature never results from such serving; and if we do not obtain divine nature, our ministry has no eternal value.

"Slaves, obey in everything those who are your earthly masters, not with eyeservice, as men-pleasers, but in singleness of heart, fearing the Lord. Whatever your task, work heartily, as serving the Lord and not men, knowing that from the Lord you will receive the inheritance as your reward; you are serving the Lord Christ." Colossians 3:22-24.

People often ask us, "Are you a full-time worker?" What they mean by full-time worker is someone who doesn't have any earthly employment, who just travels around preaching, or someone who is a paid pastor. Such a question shows their lack of understanding of what it means to serve God. These full-time workers are actually full-time servants of people! They do not serve God at all. Every work done in singleness of heart for the Lor4d results in divine nature and in the reward of the inheritance.

"Were you a slave when called? Never mind. But if you can gain your freedom, avail yourself of the opportunity. For he who was called in the Lord as a slave is a freedman of the Lord. Likewise he who was free when called is a slave of Christ. You were bought with a price; do not become slaves of men." 1 Corinthians 7:21-23. You are a slave of everyone you try to please, but it is Jesus who has redeemed us; He is our Lord. Therefore, "Whatever you do, in word or deed, do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through him." Colossians 3:17.

When we think of a slave doing religious work, and being a full-time worker, we see clearly that he would be severely restricted. But if such work was so crucial, then why did Paul write, "Never mind"? We can conclude from this that the issue is not at all the things you do, but the fruit you gain from them. If these things produce divine nature in you, you will gain eternal glory together with Jesus. Then you truly partake of the gospel.

"Nevertheless, in the Lord woman is not any better than man nor man any better than woman." 1 Corinthians 11:11.* Our ministries here in life vary, but we cannot say that one person's ministry is greater than another's. The question is, simply, do you do what you do for the Lord, or do you do it before the face of man? Do you seek your own honor, or God's honor? Is the fruit of your works sanctification, or the gratification of your flesh?

Many preachers and their wives reason like this: "If we were to have many children, we would not be able to serve the Lord." There are even some who leave their children with relatives so they can serve on the mission field. I have read newspaper articles describing how much they have sacrificed for God. But God entrusted them with the children they have, and children are a gift from the Lord. Those who leave their children behind like this understand very little about the gospel!

Paul writes, "Yet woman will be saved through bearing children, if she continues in faith and love and holiness, with modesty." 1 Timothy 2:15. Mothers that have many children don't have much time to get involved in religious work. But do they not have a golden opportunity to win their children for God? Yes, of course; but this doesn't have the same honor attached to it as serving on the mission field. It is easier to be in the limelight when out on the mission field. Paul didn't just write that a woman will be saved through childbirth; he adds, "if she continues in faith and love and holiness, with modesty."

We can apply the same thing to the slave—and to every ministry, for that matter. These things give our ministry value; without them there will be no divine nature. Only divine nature is of any value in the resurrection. The actual circumstances under which you gained divine nature will be of no consequence.

"For because he himself has suffered and been tempted, he is able to help those who re tempted." Hebrews 2:18. Sufferings produce temptations, but James writers: "Count it all joy, my brethren, when you meet various temptations, for you know that the testing of your faith produces patience. And patience shall lead to perfect works, that you may be perfect and complete, lacking nothing." James 1:2-4.

As long as temptation produces patience, there is no problem; the result will be anything but committing sin. But for temptation to produce patience, the death of Jesus must be active in my body. In temptation the sin in my flesh that has not yet been put to death is aroused, giving me an opportunity to be sanctified. This is the hidden life with Christ in God.

"Since therefore Christ suffered in the flesh, arm yourselves with the same thought, for whoever has suffered in the flesh has ceased from sin, so as to live for the rest of the time in the flesh no longer by human passions but by the will of God." 1 Peter 4:1-2. It says, ceased from sin! Indeed, this is the gospel. To live according to the will of God for the rest of my time in the flesh brings eternal glory. But for that to take place, the death of Christ must be at work in the time of temptation.

"Beloved, do not be surprised at the fiery ordeal which comes upon you to prove you, as though something strange were happening to you. But rejoice in so far as you share Christ's sufferings, that you may also rejoice and be glad when his glory is revealed." 1 Peter 4:12-13. How many people have heard such preaching?

"For Christ also died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, that he might bring us to god, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit." 1 Peter 3:18. It was this work that brought Him to ". . . all he riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." Colossians 2:2-3.

Let us follow Him; he is our forerunner. When we become servants of God and begin to serve Him, we too have the same possibilities in the time of temptation. Paul writes to Timothy, "Take heed to yourself and to your teaching; hold to that, for by so doing you will save both yourself and your hearers." 1 timothy 4:16. Those who do this are truly workers and can led people to God.

". . . because we are members of his body. 'For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother and be joined to his wife, and the two shall become one flesh.' This mystery is a profound one, and I am saying that it refers to Christ and the church." Ephesians 5:30-32. "Great indeed, we confess, is the mystery of godliness: He was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, taken up in glory." 1 Timothy 3:16.* Here we see what a great calling we have been given. We are not only to be one spirit with Him, but also one flesh. But then we must also walk in the Spirit, so that the work, which took place in Him, can also take place in us.

What kind of flesh did Jesus have? He had a flesh in which sin was condemned; ". . . and the Word became flesh, and they beheld His glory." The Word was God. They could not see the glory of Jesus in any other way than by the Word becoming flesh in Him. "He who has seen me has seen the Father," Jesus said. John 14:9. We become one flesh with Jesus in the same way and become His bride, after having suffered death according to the flesh, being made alive in the spirit, and partaking of the same knowledge and wisdom that He had. This is our heavenly calling through the gospel.





We Who Believe Enter Into Rest


"Let us therefore strive to enter that rest, that no one fall by the same sort of disobedience." Hebrews 4:11. "So we see that they were unable to enter because of unbelief." Hebrews 3:19. It is impossible to believe in God and at the same time understand His leading. "Now faith is the assurance of things hoped for, the conviction of thins not seen. For by it the men of old received divine approval." Hebrews 11:1-2.

We read about Abraham and his faith. Years passed, and to the natural mind it appeared increasingly impossible that the promise in which he had believed could be fulfilled. He considered his own body, which was as good as dead, and Sarah's barren womb, yet he grew strong in faith because he gave God the glory. Romans 4:19-21.

All unrest comes from a person's reasoning, because he does not believe God's Word. We learn this from the example of Israel's journey through the wilderness to the Promised Land. The Israelites were constantly murmuring; but we read that what they were murmuring about were God's wonders! When they r4eceived help, they rejoiced. In spite of all the miracles, they did not learn to believe so that God could have His way with them. That is why they never entered into rest, but came no further than sojourning in the wilderness and the forgiveness of sins.

In Hebrews 4:12-13, we read what the Word must do in order to led us into rest. First, it must pierce to the division of soul and spirit. The soul—which, because of its five senses, thinks it knows everything—is the cause of much unrest; the example of Israel by the Read Sea is a clear illustration of this. We must be so humble that the Word is allowed to separate and remove all our own thoughts about a matter, so that in our spirit we can rest in God. Likewise, we must allow the Word to pierce to the division of joints and marrow, so that we come to realize that we shall not carry out God's will in our own strength, but that He shall instruct us and empower us to do His will. Then we have to do with Him alone, before whom everything is open and laid bare.

This is where we can learn from Jesus. He did not grow restless and revile in return. He did not have such high thoughts abut Himself that He believed He could judge righteously. He was not yet perfected. That is why He entrusted everything to the Father. 1 Peter 2:21-23.

We read further in chapter 4 that if, in our sufferings, we know how to partake of Christ's sufferings, then our glory will be great at His appearing. Then there will be much rejoicing. Further, Peter mentions different kinds of suffering, and he counsels us to entrust our souls to a faithful Creator and continue to do good. That is the only way we can enter God's rest. However, we must humble ourselves and become meek, the very thing Jesus invites us to learn of Him. Matthew 11:28-30.

The intention is that we shall become Jesus' brothers. God knows what it takes for us to be conformed to His image. Romans 8:28-29. We do not know what we should pray for. That is why we should not form any opinions about God's leading in our lives; rather, we should rest in Him who has given us our heavenly calling. Romans 8:26; Hebrews 3:1.

Ecclesiastes 3:16-17 shows us how restless people are. It hasn't occurred to these people that trials are just what they need; consequently they become restless. In all these trials we are to rest in God and work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who is working. The children of Israel were rebellious, and God ceased working to lead them into the Promised Land. After Moses had prayed for them, God forgave them their sin, but He also drove them back into the wilderness, where they died. Numbers 14:20-23. "Now these things happened to them as a warning, but they were written down for our instruction, upon whom the end of the ages has come." 1 Corinthians 10:11.





The Sprit of Christ—The Spirit of Antichrist


Romans 8:9 and 1 John 2:18-19


Antichrist is the very opposite of Christ. We read in Philippians 2:5-8: "Have this mind among yourselves, which is yours in Christ Jesus, who, though he was in the form of God, did not count equality with God a thing to be grasped, but emptied himself, taking the form of a servant, being born in the likeness of men. And being found in human form he humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even death on a cross."

Concerning the Antichrist we read, ". . . the man of lawlessness . . . the son of perdition, who opposes and exalts himself against every so-called god or object of worship, so that he takes his seat in the temple of God, proclaiming himself to be God." 2 Thessalonians 2:3-4.

Yes, this is a stark contrast. It is written of Jesus that when the devil came to tempt Him, he tempted Him to perform signs and wonders. The devil tempted Him by offering Him the opportunity to gain the whole world. Jesus was gifted enough and had that potential. He had only to worship Satan. But in so ding, He would have become the Antichrist. Matthew 4:1-4. Then He would not have been persecuted either.

In what we read previously about Jesus who gave us the gospel, the fact that He was of the seed of David according to the flesh, was stressed. There was nothing extraordinary about Him. There was nothing to admire about Him. That is why people saw in Him nothing more than a carpenter's son.

Jesus worked hard at purging His disciples of the spirit that wanted to exalt itself. They did not understand Jesus, who humbled Himself. Matthew 20:21-28. But after He had arisen from the dead, they received clear light on this point. On the day of Pentecost they were filled with the Spirit of Christ, and then they could proclaim the gospel. Acts 13:37-39. Now there was One who was of the flesh of David who had put to death sin in the flesh—something the law could not do. He did not see corruption; He rose from the dead.

Now they could proclaim the forgiveness of sins through Him, which they had received by sacrificing animals, when they were under the law. They could also proclaim the gospel: "And by him every one that believes is freed from everything from which you could not be freed by the law of Moses." Verse 39.

This was a tremendous victory and a liberating message for the people. Now those who believed could be saved from death and from him who had the power of death. Hebrews 2:14-18. The Antichrist could not tolerate this. It became an urgent matter for him to explain away the gospel so that people could not enter into this salvation. He could not explain away Jesus' greatness or deny the fact that He rose from the dead, but he could explain away His humiliation. He could explain away the fact that Jesus had the flesh of David, in which sin had to be put to death. The Antichrist not only wanted to magnify Christ on account of His resurrection from the dead, he also wanted to exalt him in the days of His flesh by making Him out to be someone who was not tempted lie we are. He wanted to make sure we did not get such a "lowly" Savior. He made Him appear to be so "exalted" in the days of His flesh that He was untouched by the sort of temptations that you and I have.

This is how the spirit of Antichrist has explained away the work God did in Jesus in the days of His flesh. The gospel, the very thing that gives us hope that we can be conformed to His image and partake of divine nature, gets explained away. Philippians 3:7-11; 2 Peter 1"3-4. Once the spirit of Antichrist has succeeded in explaining away the gospel, all that remains is the forgiveness of sins, which they already had under the law through the sacrifice of animals. Those who have been led astray by the spirit of Antichrist not only explain away the fact that Jesus had the same flesh as David, they also brand it as the most dangerous heresy anywhere. Thus they scare away simple souls. How significant that it is written, "And by fair and flattering words they deceive the hearts of the simple-minded." Romans 16:18.

When they speak about Jesus as the Son of Man, they construct a kind of flesh, which no one has ever had. In fact, Catholics even teach that the Virgin Mary had a "holy" flesh, which was supposed to have qualified her to bring forth Jesus in such a holy state. But then we must ask: What about Mary's own mother? Yes, they are simple souls indeed that let themselves be deceived by such sweet words—words for which there is simply no support in Scripture.

None of these preachers have personally partaken of the gospel, which by the knowledge of Jesus has given us the greatest and most precious promises of becoming partakers of the divine nature. 2 Peter 1:3-4. Consequently, they cannot proclaim the gospel either. But that isn't all. They also have to explain away the gospel so that they themselves will not be revealed as deceivers.

John said in his time: "children, it is the last hour; and as you have heard that antichrist is coming, so now many antichrists have come; therefore we know that it is the last hour. They went out from us, but they were not of us; for if they had been of us, they would have continued with us; but they went out, that it might be plain that they all are not of us." 1 John 2:18-19.

The law said, "You shall not covet." Romans 7:7.* to liberate people from coveting was impossible for the law, because the law was powerless on account of the flesh. But "God has done what the law, weakened by the flesh, could not do: sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin, he condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the just requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not according to the flesh but according to the Spirit." Romans 8:3-4. Here we see the distinction John writes about. "For those who live according to the flesh set their minds on the things of the flesh, but those who live according to the Spirit set their minds on the thins of the Spirit." Verse 5.

It is evident that the vast majority set their minds on the things of the flesh. They want to gratify their lusts and still have the forgiveness of sins. They are like those whom Paul often spoke about "and now even tell you with tears, [many] live as enemies of the cross of Christ. Their end is destruction, their god is the belly, and they glory in their shame, with minds set on earthly things." Philippians 3:18-19.

They desire the things of the flesh and are not interested in hearing about how God sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and condemned sin in the flesh. They only want to hear bout how God did what the law could not do—that is, how He sent His Son to keep the law in our stead. They are only too happy to read the first part of Romans 8:3, but they want no part of verse 4, which explains that the just requirement of the law shall be fulfilled in us. They don't want to be among those who fulfill that verse.

There are many such people, Paul writes. Indeed, they have formed large denominations and started many Bible schools. "For we are not, like so many, peddlers of God's word; but as men of sincerity, as commissioned by God, in the sight of God, we speak in Christ." 2 Corinthians 2:17.

Those who remained, out of all the souls John had gathered (1 John 2:19), were able to say with Paul, "But our commonwealth is in heaven, and from it we await a Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ, who will change our lowly body to be like his glorious body, by the power which enables him even to subject all things to himself." Philippians 3:20-21.

These souls are just as happy to read verse 4 of Romans 8. In their flesh the same thing is accomplished as was accomplished in the flesh of Jesus. They walk in the Spirit. Their comfort is not only that they have the forgiveness of sins, but that their lusts are put to death—which the law was powerless to do. Romans 8:12-14. Thus they also become one flesh with Him. Ephesians 5:31-32. They experience the truth of the scripture, "In everything God works for good." And so they are conformed to the image of the Son, that He might be the first-born among many brethren. Romans 8:28-29.

The apostle John has been called the apostle of love, because he wrote much about love. Jesus called him "son of thunder." Mark 3:17. Both names suite him very well. His love for his fellow man stirred him to warn against deceiving spirits; he demonstrated that they were of the spirit of Antichrist. He could recognize them because they did not confess that Jesus was the Christ and that He had come in the flesh. 1 John 4:1-3.

"For many deceivers have gone out into the world, men who will not acknowledge the coming of Jesus Christ in the flesh; such a one is the deceiver and the antichrist. Look to yourselves, that you may not lose what you have worked for, but may win a full reward." 2 John 7-8.

In Philippians we are exhorted to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling. This exhortation comes right after Paul had explained that Jesus emptied Himself, took the form of a servant, and humbled Himself. Then he adds, "for God is at work in you, both to will and to work for his good pleasure." (Read Philippians 2:5-15) If, having heard about the mind that was in Christ Jesus, the Philippians were to be gin to work out their salvation according to the leading of the Spirit, they would make great progress in "being conformed to the image of his Son." But if, on the other hand, they were to receive the spirit of Antichrist, which denies that Jesus has come in the flesh, they would lose all hope of being conformed to the image of Jesus. In that case, all their work on their salvation would turn out to have been in vain.

Work out your salvation with fear and trembling! Who has ever heard such an exhortation? You never hear it from the spirit of Antichrist. "Strive for peace with all men, and for the holiness without which no one will see the Lord." Hebrews 12:14. Who has ever heard an exhortation like this? The spirit of Antichrist never exhorts us to do anything of the kind! And we can thereby clearly distinguish between the spirit of Antichrist and the Spirit of Christ.

When we receive light about how the spirit of Antichrist works and what it has accomplished in the religious world, it is simply astounding. The spirit of Antichrist has so denied and twisted the work God accomplished by sending His Son and condemning sin in the flesh that virtually all religious people regard the gospel about his work as the worst heresy there is. Acts 28:22. This spirit has preached away the entire gospel. That is why almost nowhere in the world will you hear anyone stressing the first pat of the gospel "concerning his Son, who has descended from David according to the flesh."

It is just the same with grace, which is falsified in the same way. "For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ." John 1:17. But the spirit of Antichrist has preached grace to mean that Jesus fulfilled the law in our stead, and that His righteousness is imputed to us. "Now we are under grace, so it doesn't really matter if we commit sin. The worse sinners we are, the more that grace abounds." This notion already existed in the time of the apostles. Hebrews 2:1-4.

"What shall we say then? Are we to continue in sin that grace may abound? By no means! How can we who died to sin still live in it?" Romans 6:1-2. "For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace. What then? Are we to sin because we are not under law but under grace? By no means!" Verses 14-15. In these passages, the apostle battled against the spirit of Antichrist, which had lulled people into taking false comfort in grace.

"For I would have you know, brethren, that the gospel which was preached by me is not man's gospel. For I did not receive it from man, nor was I taught it, but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ." Before this he writes, "but even if we, or an angel from heaven, should preach to you a gospel contrary to that which we preached to you, let him be accursed . . . ." Galatians 1:8-12.

Jesus was the surety of a better hope than the hope they had under the law. Hebrews 7:19-25. God did not send His Son in order to cover up sin, but to save us and deliver us from sin. The epistle of Jude tells us how some had already succeeded in falsifying God's grace. These were ungodly men who turned the grace of God into licentiousness. They were so bold in their licentiousness that they shamelessly caroused together at the church's love feasts. How strange that there were none among them who had the power to deal with the situation.

In one sense it is easier for us now than it was in the apostles' days. When they began to preach the gospel, there was only one gathering of Christians in any given locality. But it didn't take long before many began to falsify the gospel, and John saw that many people went out from them. Gradually there were more and more places people could choose to go. Today there are countless places one can go. Therefore it is not our experience that people come among us, only to leave later. No, when this kind of people come to our meetings and hear about obedience and about taking up the cross daily in order to follow Jesus, they say: "This is bondage; these people are trying to save themselves." They don't believe in the finished work of Jesus, and they soon leave. There are many religious assemblies, so it is not difficult to find another place that is more to their taste. That is why we have peace and rest in which to be built up together on our most holy faith and to pray in the Holy Spirit, keeping ourselves in the love of God as we wait for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life. Jude 20-21.

"And as every one must confess, great is the mystery of godliness: He was manifested in the flesh, justified in the spirit, seen by angels, preached among the nations, believed on in the world, taken up in glory." 1 Timothy 3:16.*

The spirit of Antichrist has managed to explain away the humiliation of Jesus so thoroughly that you would have a hard time finding a single person outside the church who understands it. When we think about how many learned people, professors, those with doctoral degrees, Bible teachers, and famous speakers there are, you would have thought that we would have encountered some among them in our time who had received revelation about Jesus manifested in the flesh and justified in the spirit; but we have not met anyone outside the church who has had this revelation. They have been deceived by the spirit of Antichrist, and they explain away Jesus' humiliation n spite of the fact that it is written about so clearly. For example; Romans 1:3-4 and 8:3-4; 1 Corinthians 12:12-13; 2 Corinthians 5:14-15; Philippians 3:10; Hebrews 2:10-11, 124-18; 4:14-16, 5:7-10; 1 John 4:1-3; 2 John 7-8—and many other scriptures as well. If you bring the teaching about Jesus' humiliation to the attention of these learned people, who are so highly esteemed in the eyes of man, they just explain it away and regard it as heresy. This is how the spirit of Antichrist has succeeded in explaining away the salvation that God gave us when He sent His Son.

In our days God had to use a sailor to reveal this great mystery and this deception of Antichrist. He chose Johan O. Smith, a man who loved the truth, a man who did not seek honor. God chose one who was nothing in the eyes of man. The light he received was revelation from the Spirit and not a result of human study. This was in keeping with Jesus' humiliation. This is how Jesus' words were fulfilled: "At that time Jesus declared, 'I thank thee, Father, Lord of heaven and earth, that thou hast hidden these things from the wise and understanding and revealed them to babes; year, Father, for such was thy gracious will.'" Matthew 11:25-26.

And yet our comfort is that the only ones who will be led astray are those who do not love the truth but take pleasure in unrighteousness. The remainder will partake of sanctification by the Spirit and belief of the truth, to which He called us through the gospel so that we may obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians 2:13.

"The coming of the lawless one by the activity of Satan will be with all power and with pretended signs and wonders . . . ." 2 Thessalonians 2:9-12. People today will travel far and wide and come together to see and experience something sensational. Frequently it involves healing for the body. Such activity became widespread particularly after the last World War. Preachers traveled around holding revival meetings that emphasized signs and wonders. They attracted thousands who came to see and to be healed. But it quickly became apparent that the object of all these revivals was to gather large crowds and big collections—nothing more! This is the spirit of Antichrist. Satan makes use of this to lead people away from sanctification so that they cannot see God. Hebrews 12:14.

"Therefore God sends upon them a strong delusion, to make them believe what is false, so that all may be condemned who did not believe the truth but had pleasure in unrighteousness." 2 Thessalonians 2:11-12.

Many religious people are conservative. They are not driven to and fro by every kind of advertisement or by those who are conformed to the world. Nevertheless, they have not acted on these words of Jesus: "If any man would come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me" Matthew 16:24. They do not love the truth that they might partake of sanctification. 1 Corinthians 11:31-32. But then the time comes for God to send strong delusion that people might believe what is false, then they, too, will be led astray. In view of this, we can appreciate how precious the brothers are whom Paul writes about in 2 Thessalonians 2:11-14.

We can receive instruction from Peter's two epistles. From them we can gain insight into those things which have true value. Peter had the gift of healing in such full measure that his mere shadow was sufficient to heal; he even raised people from the dead. Considering the fact that he wrote two epistles, we might have expected him to write a great deal bout all the miracles he had experienced; in fact, he doesn't mention a word about them. Read his epistles and think carefully about what he writes, and follow his exhortations. Then you will not be deceived; you will come to the glory of Jesus Christ to which we are called. Then the spirit of Antichrist cannot deceive you.

Paul begins his epistle to the Romans by writing about obedience; he continues on the subject of obedience, and he concludes his letter by writing about obedience. If we speak about obedience, we must necessarily speak about works. We understand that we are members of Christ's body, and we understand that Christ was not without works. As members of Christ's body we are led by the Head, who is Christ. Ephesians 4:15-16. Then we have not received God's grace in vain; God has fulfilled His plan with us. We have become partakers of the salvation that Jesus has made possible for us, and are untouched by the spirit of Antichrist.





Those Who Are Pure Shall Understand


"Many shall purify themselves, and make themselves white, and be refined; but the wicked shall do wickedly; and none of the wicked shall understand; but those who are wise shall understand." Daniel 12:10.

"But as to the times and the seasons, brethren, you have no need to have anything written to you. For you yourselves know well that he day of the Lord will come like a thief in the night. When people say, 'there is peace and security,' then sudden destruction will come upon them as travail comes upon a woman with child, and there will be no escape. But you are not in darkness, brethren, for that day to surprise you like a thief." 1 Thessalonians 5:1-4. "Beloved, we are God's children now; it does not yet appear what we shall be, but we know that when he appears we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. And every one who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure." 1 John 3:2-3.

"Therefore come out from them, and be separate from them, says the Lord, and touch nothing unclean; then I will welcome you, and I will be a father to you, and you shall be my sons and daughters, says the Lord Almighty." 2 Corinthians 6:17-18.

It is quite clear from these verses that we cannot study our way to light and understanding. We must be in communion with God so that He can reveal the times, the seasons, and the Scriptures to us. "First of all you must understand this, that no prophecy of scripture is a matter of one's own interpretation, because no prophecy ever came by the impulse of man, but men moved by the Holy Spirit spoke from God." 2 Peter 1:20-21.

Worldly education will not help us here, because we cannot study our way to an understanding of the Scriptures. Then what are we to do with all these hundreds of bible schools? Every religious denomination has its own system of interpretation and set of doctrines, and often its own Bible school or theological seminary. All this leads to contention and division. They don't understand the simplest words of Jesus in His prayer: "And now I am no more in the world, but they are in the world, and I am coming to thee, Holy Father, keep them in thy name, which thou has given me, that they may be one, even as we are one. While I was with them, I kept them in they name, which thou hast given me; I have guarded them, and none of them is lost but the son of perdition, that the scripture might be fulfilled." John 17:11-12.

Even our human reason tells us that when they gather in different names, they cannot be one even as the Father and the Son are one. So we must ask: "Why, then, do they do it?" Actually, it is easy to understand why. To begin with they want to be leaders, and they think their lofty thoughts represent 'correct thinking." But they aren't thinking in terms of leading people to sanctification and divine nature. For them it is solely a question of "What do you teach?" They never ask you, "How do you live?" They like to sit on a high platform; and if they can't be the leader, then perhaps they can be elected as an elder. This is why there is so much competition among them. It is quite clear that they are being led by, or are defiled by, the spirit of Antichrist, as Paul writes in Philippians 3:18-19.

This passage shows how far things had developed in the spirit of Antichrist even while the apostles were still living. It is also an apt description of the religious situation in our own day. But who would have imagined that things could have developed to such an extent while the apostles were still alive!

When God sent His Son, who was born in Bethlehem, He revealed Himself to the shepherds in the fields. They received revelation. The wise men from the East went to Herod, from whom they thought they could find out where the King was born. Herod, in turn sent for the scribes. They knew that he was to be born in Bethlehem, and yet they were in the dark about everything else. They did not have the kind of fellowship with God so that He could reveal Himself to them. This is how it was in the days of Noah; all they did was eat and drink, marry, and give in marriage. The day came upon them like a thief. And then we read about Enoch: he lived in faith; he lived a life that pleased God. I suspect that no one saw him being raptured. No doubt, God came like a thief and took him away.

And so it is today. Many people write books and try to calculate the day of Jesus' return. I have seen this a number of times. When their predictions fail, they simply cannot see that they need to acknowledge that they did not have revelation from God. God could not reveal Himself to them. It is just the same today as it was in the days of old. People want the honor of being regarded as true prophets, and yet they have no revelation from God. Read Jeremiah 23:14-21 and you will see further what they wold have done had they stood in God's secret counsels.

Things are just the same today. You see in the newspaper advertisements what really interests people. Just about the only thing that matters to them is entertainment. This is the spirit of Antichrist. Religious workers want to gather many people, and everything has to be done on a large scale. We see that Paul's prophecy has been fulfilled, as it says in 2 Timothy 4:1-4. Follow the exhortation in verse 5! We could go on giving examples. For instance, read the seven letters to the churches in Revelation. The important thing for us is to be in that group of whom it is written, "[Let] the righteous still do right, and the holy continue to be sanctified." Revelation 22:11.* This is written in connection with Jesus' soon return. He is not coming like a thief for those who cleanse themselves. God's wrath has not been appointed for them. (Read 1 Thessalonians 5:8-11.)

It is important that we heed the exhortations in 1 Thessalonians 5:11.* "therefore exhort one another and build one another up, just as you are doing." Then Jesus will not come like a thief for us. We will be ready as Jesus' bride when the trumpet sounds, just as Enoch, Noah, and Elijah were in their day. 1 Thessalonians 4:16-18.





The Inner Man


Ephesians 3:14-21


". . . that according to the riches of his glory he may grant you to be strengthened with might through his Spirit in the inner man, and that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith; that you, being rooted and grounded in love, may have power to comprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and height and depth, and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge, that you may be filled with all the fullness of God." Verses 16-19.

From the above we see that we need to be strengthened in our inner man in order to be rooted and grounded in love. The tribulations and difficulties of life touch our outward man. This, in turn, ha an effect on our inner man, with the result that most people come out of love because they cannot bear up under it all. They nurse grudges; they lose courage, get depressed, and are often withdrawn. All this has an effect on the outward man, and everything just gets worse. They get caught in a vicious circle.

The reason for this is that people have forgotten Jesus' words that man does not live by bread alone, but by every word that proceeds from the mouth of God. Matthew 4:4. It is the outward man that lives by bread. God fashioned man of the dust of the earth; that is why we must keep our bodies alive with what comes up from the ground. God breathed the breath of life into man's nostrils, and man became a living soul. Genesis 2:7.

Spirit and soul constitute the inner man, which comes from God and must be nourished by God's Word. If you forget this, you cannot bear the tribulations that come your way, and the evil one will have power over you. That is why we constantly hear people making demands and complaining. You can tell they are not happy. What they lack is nourishment for their inner man. The usual thing is that they get fellowship with the accuser (Revelation 12:9-12) and thus lose the place in heaven for which they were raised in Christ Jesus. We read that the accuser was cast down to the earth; but we also read how we can overcome him.

"[You will be] nourished on the words of the faith and of the good doctrine which you have followed." 1 Timothy 4:6. In 2 Timothy 3:15-17 we read, "how from childhood you have been acquainted with the sacred writings which are able to instruct you for salvation through faith in Christ Jesus. All scripture is inspired by God and profitable for teaching, for reproof, for correction, and for training in righteousness, that the man of God may be complete, equipped for every good work." "We know that in everything God works for good with those who love him, who are called according to his purpose." Romans 8:28.

We see that God's Word becomes nourishment for our inner man. We receive light and understanding about how we are to solve every problem so that everything will work together for our good. Then we will not be overcome by all the tribulations that befall our outward man. Read 2 Corinthians 4:7-11. "For this slight momentary affliction is preparing for us an eternal weight of glory beyond all comparison, because we look not to the things that are seen but to the things that are unseen; for the things that are seen are transient, but the things that are unseen are eternal." Verses 17-18.

We read in Ephesians that if we are grounded in love, we can be filled with all the fullness of God. "Now to him who by the power at work within us is able to do far more abundantly than all that we ask or think . . . ." Ephesians 3:20. The condition is that we love God, and that we abide in love. Through this nourishment everything will become a source of joy to us. If we read James 1:2-6 and 1 Peter 4:12-13, we will be convinced of God's leading and His salvation. Then we will not be crushed by what happens to our outward man; rather, we will be renewed in our inner man, that man which delights in the law of God. Romans 7:22.





Two Fundamental Things in the Life of a Christian


Romans 8:13; 2 Peter 1:5-13


". . . for if you live according to the flesh you will die, but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body you will live." Romans 8:13. "for this very reason, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue . . . ." 2 Peter 1:5.*

It is the Spirit who reveals the deeds of the body to me. These are deeds to which my mind has not consented. "For I delight in the law of God, in my inmost self, but I see in my members another law at war with the law of my mind and making me captive to the law of sin which dwells in my members." Romans 7:22. The law of sin in my members is something I have not yet received light over; thus I have not been able to commit it into the death of Christ. But the Spirit is to guide me into all the truth. Therefore, when I want to do the good, the Spirit begins to instruct me about what has not yet been put to death.

I cannot receive light over everything all at once. There is a way through the flesh. The Spirit gives me light bit by bit, as I am able to receive it. Thus it is not I who do what I do not want, but sin that dwells in me. Verse 17. When I see it, I hate it, as it is written, "Now if I do what I do not want, it is no longer I that do it, but sin which dwells in me." Verse 20. Now it becomes a matter of utmost importance for me to serve in the newness of the Spirit and put si to death. In this way my spirit is made alive to god's wisdom. This is how I grow in Christ. If I do not love the truth, I will be led astray; I will not partake of sanctification by the Spirit, nor will I be able to obtain the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ. 2 Thessalonians 2:12-15. In order to partake of the gospel, we must be obedient. Romans 1:5.

Then there is another matter of vital importance: We are to add virtue to our faith. 2 Peter 1:5. Reading further, we see that Peter emphasizes strongly that these virtues are to be present, and that they are to abound. Otherwise, we will be unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. He writes: "for whoever lacks these things is blind, and shortsighted and has forgotten that he was cleansed from his old sins. Therefore, brethren, be the more zealous to confirm your call and election, for if you do this you will never stumble; so there will be richly provided for you an entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ." Verses 9-11.*

Peter writes that if we add virtue to our faith, and if these virtues are increasing, we will never stumble. 2 Peter 1:5-10. To stumble means that something comes out of us that leaves a bad taste. Think back and recall how things have come out of your mouth that were not good. The reason for this was that you were not thinking about adding virtue to your faith. If this had been on your heart, you would not have stumbled. And so Peter deemed it necessary to arouse them by way of reminder.

If we just think about it a little, we will realize that whenever we do or say something bad, we have a demanding spirit. To demand is the same as to covet or lust. If we had served in the newness of the Spirit, all this demanding would have been put to death, and we would not have stumbled or fallen.

In giving us examples of Jesus' steps, Peter mentions, among other things, "When he was reviled, he did not revile in return; when he suffered, he did not threaten; but he trusted to him who judges justly." 1 Peter 2:23. Here we see the humility of Jesus. It wasn't just that He didn't revile in return and didn't threaten; he did not judge, either. He did not reckon that He could judge justly. Many can have come to victory in the sense that they do not answer back; but who, indeed, has overcome to such an extent that he refrains from judging those who reviled him in the first place? N cases where they have not reviled in return, people can, nevertheless, have spoken about it to others. Then they are backbiting. What is more, they seek honor in doing so. They have exalted themselves. This is what the Antichrist does.

Peter gives another example of Jesus' steps in which we are called to follow: "for Christ also died for sins once for all, the righteous for the unrighteous, that the might bring us to god, being put to death in the flesh but made alive in the spirit." 1 Peter 3:18. Jesus was righteous. He never sinned, but it is clear that He was tempted. If He was not tempted, then there was nothing for Him to overcome. He served in the newness of the Spirit. When He was tempted, He saw the lust that was in the flesh. He put this lust to death; therefore, He was made alive in the spirit. This tells us that He had a development, and that was the reason why He was made perfect.

We hare to have this same development. When God condemned sin in the flesh, Jesus understood His own task, which was to put to death what the Father condemned; and He offered Himself in the power of an eternal spirit. It was in the days of His flesh that He learned obedience through what He suffered. In this way He attained to the glory of His Father—He attained to the resurrection from the dead, "called of God High Priest according to the order of Melchizedek."

"Jesus said to them, 'My food is to do the will of him who sent me, and to accomplish his work.'" John 4:34. The apostles did not as yet understand this; but they did later when they received the Holy Spirit. Then doing God's will, and doing the work Jesus came to accomplish, became their food as well. They began to serve in the newness of the Spirit so that sin could be put to death in the flesh. Does this interest you, or would you rather find fault, backbite, and judge others? John 4:31-34.

Now the question for us is this: do we know what Jesus' steps are? Do we know how to serve in the newness of the Spirit? When I am reviled, do I listen to the Spirit when He wants to tell me the truth about what dwells in my own flesh? When I have a clear conscience and must suffer for the unjust, can I then be led by the Spirit to the very thing in my flesh that is to be put to death, so that my spirit can become more living for "all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery, of Christ?" 2 Thessalonians 2:14; 1 John 1:7-8.

To what was the spirit of Jesus made alive? We read in Colossians 2:2-3, ". . . that their hearts may be encouraged as they are knit together in love, to have all the riches of assured understanding and the knowledge of God's mystery, of Christ, in whom are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge." It was this wisdom and knowledge of God to which His spirit was made alive, as we read in verse 3. And we enter into this same development when we serve in the newness of the Spirit. Then we are not led astray by the spirit of Antichrist.

The root of all sin is the lusts and desires. In order to add virtue to our faith, we must be in the Spirit of Jesus—the One who humbled Himself. Without humility we cannot grow in the virtues. By humility and through the growth of Christ's virtues in our lives, we become fruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus. Thus we gain a rich entrance into the eternal kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.





What Does Grace Mean to Us?


Grace means that all my sins are forgiven when I confess them. 1 John 1:9 and 2:1-2. Grace also means that I can reign in life through the one Man, Jesus Christ. Romans 5:7. Jesus had such glory as of the only son from the Father—full of grace and truth. What did this mean to Him? It meant that everything was possible for Him. Mark 9:23. "And from his fullness have we all received, grace upon grace. For the law was given through Moses; grace and truth came through Jesus Christ." John 1:14-17.

When we have received of that fullness, "grace upon grace" it means that we first receive grace for the forgiveness of our sins, and then, by "grace upon grace" we receive power to obey the truth that Jesus came with. By these mercies Paul could exhort the Romans to seek all the acceptable will of God. He gives these exhortations in Romans 12 and in several other chapters. In other words, there is no limit to what we can accomplish in grace by the will of God.

Those who falsify grace divest it of truth. Obedience, they think, is just something that pertains to the law. Such people are living in sin. (Read the epistle of Jude.) "For sin will have no dominion over you, since you are not under law but under grace." Romans 6:14. When Paul writes that he was set apart to preach the gospel, he adds: ". . . through whom we have received grace and apostleship to bring abut the obedience of faith for the sake of his name among all the nations." Romans 1:1-5.

Paul writes further that they were to avoid those who created dissensions and difficulties, opposition to the doctrine that they had been taught, for such people did not serve the Lord Jesus Christ. Because the obedience of the Romans had become common knowledge, Paul rejoiced over them. Romans 16:17-19.

Here we see what the church in Rome had come to through this fullness: grace upon grace. And it is written: "then what becomes of our boasting? It is excluded. On what principle? On the principle of works? No, but on the principle of faith." Romans 3:27. Then we can also ask: "What does grace mean to me?" It means that I have no ground for boasting, no matter what I might attain to through the gospel. This preserves us from the snare of Satan. 1 Timothy 3:6-7; 2 Timothy 2:26. The snare of Satan is, first and foremost, to get us to exalt ourselves. Those who are zealous are always at risk, especially if God blesses their work; so we must always be vigilant on this point. And the more God blesses us, the more deeply we must humble ourselves.

We have a particularly good example in Paul, who wrote: ". . . though it was not I, bu the grace of god which is with me." And: "but by the grace of God I am what I am, and his grace toward me was not in vain." 1 Corinthians 15:10. We read in 2 Corinthians 12 that Paul had a thorn in the flesh in order that he might not exalt himself on account of the abundance of revelations he had received. He besought the Lord three times to take it away, but God replied: "My grace is sufficient for you." Paul thought he could remain humble without this thorn in the flesh, but God knew that he needed it. And so it is when God blesses us in a special way; he must also send us the trials and chastisement that we need to remain in humility. This is not just to preserve us in the degree of humility we already have, but that we might increase in humility and become saved from our natural, human strength so we can become even more fruitful.

We can hear that some people are extremely zealous for godliness, and it is good to hear them. In this zeal for godliness there is great hope. At the same time, it is also easy to tell when they are speaking in their natural strength; there is not the same anointing over their ministry as there is over the ministry of those who have grown more in humility. The anointing does not take away one's zeal, but that zeal becomes more godly. And then those who hear them gain more confidence in them, which makes their ministry all the more effective. This is all a part of our growth in God. All wholehearted souls need to time to grow in grace. Those who love grace and truth rejoice over such brothers.

We read in 1 Corinthians 3:4-11 that there were those who argued about who was the greatest. By doing this they demonstrated that they were carnal, infants in Christ. Paul writes: "I planted, Apollos watered, but God gave the growth. So neither he who plants nor he who waters is anything, but only God who gives the growth. He who plants and he who waters are one,* and each shall receive his wages according to his labor." 1 Corinthians 3:6-8.

What does grace produce for us who are fellow workers? It preserves us from contention and divisions and from falling into the snare of Satan. "With the humble is wisdom." Proverbs 11:2; Psalms 119:71 and 75. God gives growth to what I receive grace to sow, in proportion to my humility.

May God strengthen you who are upright, that you may "set your hope fully upon the grace that is coming to you at the revelation of Jesus Christ." 1 Peter 1:13.





