The new covenant





Sigurd Bratlie





License


	 		This e-Book is licensed to:



		Hans-Willem van der Waal

		jwh.vd.waal@filternet.nl

		Church: Rotterdam



		Downloaded from Brunstad Portal: 12/25/2015



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag





Colophon




	SIGURD BRATLIE



	The New Covenant

	and the

	Mystery of Lawlessness





	 		Translated from the Norwegian

		Original title: Den nye pakt og lovløshetens hemmelighet

		First published in 1952



		English Edition: Seventh edition (revised): 2000



		e-Book version: 2010 (revision: 23-03-2015)

		ISBN 978-82-8253-003-3 (ePub format)



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag

		P.O. Box 900

		3168 Melsomvik

		Norway



		www.ssfnett.no

		www.brunstad.org





		 		Scripture quotations are from the 		New King James Version (NKJV) of the Bible (1982) 		Scripture references that vary from the NKJV 		are direct translations from the Norwegian Bible 		translation used by the author.





Copyright and terms of use




Copyright



			 	© This material is protected by the copyright law. Reproduction and/or making the material publicly available, is prohibited without the prior written consent of Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc., P.O. Box 2846, Winnipeg, MB Canada R3C 4B4, if not as the result of invariable established law. Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, P.B. 900, Brunstad, N-3168 Melsomvik, Norway [including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc.]

	(See www.ssfnett.no and www.brunstad.org)





Terms of use



	This e-Book is licensed only for personal use and can thus not be resold or given to other persons. 	If you want to share this book with others, you can refer them to portal.brunstad.org. 	If you read this e-Book and not have your own personalized copy, you should go to portal.brunstad.org and download your own copy.



	Thank you for respecting these terms of use.





The New Covenant


“Then He took the cup, and gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, ‘Drink from it, all of you, for this is My blood of the new covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins.’” Matt. 26:27-28.

A covenant is, by definition, a mutual commitment between two parties. Those who drank of the cup entered into the new covenant that Jesus sealed with His own blood. They committed themselves, and Jesus and the Father committed themselves.

The apostle compares the new and the old covenants when he writes, “Therefore not even the first covenant was dedicated without blood.” Heb. 9:18. Both covenants were dedicated in the same way. The difference, however, was that while the first covenant was weak and powerless and could not lead to perfection, the new covenant could. Heb. 7:18-19. We can understand the new covenant better by taking a look at the old covenant.

“Then he took the Book of the Covenant and read in the hearing of the people. And they said, ‘All that the Lord has said we will do, and be obedient.’ And Moses took the blood, sprinkled it on the people, and said, ‘This is the blood of the covenant which the Lord has made with you according to all these words.’” Ex. 24:7-8.

It was only after they had committed themselves to do and to obey what was written in the Book of the Covenant that they were sprinkled with the blood of the covenant. Peter preached the new covenant in exactly the same way: “Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, for obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.” 1 Pet. 1:2.

In the first covenant they committed themselves to keep the law, which came through Moses. The law was part of God’s will. God committed Himself to bless them with all earthly blessings and make them the head of all the nations if they obeyed, but He also committed Himself to something more—namely, to curse them if they disobeyed. Deut. 28.

Joshua made this clear to the people after they had entered the Promised Land. Once again they had to make a choice, and they still chose to serve the Lord. Josh. 24:19-22. Jesus also reminds us that we must count the cost.

In the first covenant they committed themselves to keep that part of God’s will that came through Moses, but in the new covenant we commit ourselves to obey all the will of God, for the truth came through Jesus Christ. John 1:17. You might ask, “If this is the case, who can then turn to the Lord? Surely no one can fulfill those conditions.” Certainly we can! Jesus came, not only with truth, but also with grace—that is, with help. Grace is mentioned first, then truth. If you have committed yourself to obey all the will of God, then the Lord commits Himself to clothe you with power from on high, to equip you with everything that pertains to life and godliness, to write His laws in your heart and mind, and to bless you with all spiritual blessings; and whatever you need to sustain your earthly body will be added to you. What more could you wish for?

The new covenant is clearly expressed in Jesus’ parting words when he says, “All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit, teaching them to observe all things that I have commanded you; and lo, I am with you always, even to the end of the age.” Matt. 28:18-20.

We can also put it this way: In the old covenant the people committed themselves to tithe; in return, the Lord committed Himself to bless them with all earthly blessings. But this covenant was inadequate, so a new covenant was established. In the new covenant we commit ourselves to give everything; in return, God pledges to blot out our sins, to bless us with all spiritual blessings, and with the earthly things that we need.

The first covenant was consecrated with the blood of bulls, but the second covenant was consecrated with the precious blood of Jesus. Therefore it is called “the blood of the covenant.” Mark 14:24 and Heb. 10:29. If we want the blood of Christ to benefit us personally, we must enter into the new covenant; first we present ourselves unto obedience, then we are sprinkled by the blood of Jesus.

There is as much difference between the old and new covenants as there is between the shadow and the body that casts the shadow.





The Forgiveness of Sins


You may say, “Surely we can receive the forgiveness of sins without entering into the new covenant!” No, because praying for the forgiveness of your sins is the same as entering the new covenant, because it is Jesus’ blood that cleanses us from sin.

This is easy to understand in the natural realm; but in the spiritual realm, the harlot has corrupted our understanding—yet a little child can easily understand it. When a son comes to his father to ask for forgiveness, he will quite naturally say, “I won’t do it again!” This is the covenant. And if the child does not say it, the father will ask, “Will you promise never to do it again?” If the child answers “Yes,” his father forgives him. This is in complete agreement with Jesus’ parting words, “That repentance and remission of sins should be preached in His name to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem.” Luke 24:47. First repentance, then forgiveness of sins.

Let us look at how the apostles preached the forgiveness of sins on the day of Pentecost. When the people asked what they had to do to be saved, “Peter said to them, ‘Repent, and let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins; and you shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.’” Acts 2:38.

First repentance, then baptism. From Jesus’ parting words we understand that baptism is a consecration to discipleship—a covenant of a good conscience with God (1 Pet. 3:21)—that we may learn to observe all things which Jesus has commanded us. The apostle Peter says, “Lay hold of a different mind [Norw. Trans.] and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, so that times of refreshing may come from the presence of the Lord.” Acts 3:19.

This tells us clearly that our sins are not wiped out unless we undergo a change of heart and mind. Our former mind was to seek the world and the things of the world. Then we received a new mind and were baptized. The first world (the visible world)—my old man and my old life—are buried with Christ, and I am raised with Him. Now I seek those things which are above, where Christ is seated, and not the things of this earth. Col. 2:11-12 and 3:1-3.

“Do not love the world or the things in the world. If anyone loves the world, the love of the Father is not in him.” 1 John 2:15.

It is clear that our sins are not forgiven if the love of the Father is not in us. Many people are deceived on this point. The apostle Paul was chosen by God to preach the forgiveness of sins in the same way. He says, “I will deliver you from the Jewish people, as well as from the Gentiles, to whom I now send you, to open their eyes in order to turn them from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive forgiveness of sins and an inheritance among those who are sanctified by faith in Me.” Acts 26:17-18.

In other words, to receive forgiveness of sins means to turn from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to God. So the blood of Jesus, God’s Son, only cleanses us from all sin if we walk in the light. 1 John 1:7. Paul received his apostleship “for obedience to the faith among all nations for His name.” Rom. 1:5. Therefore, when they were baptized—when they had entered into the new covenant—they were promised the gift of the Holy Spirit, that would give them everything they needed in order to keep the covenant.





Introducing a Better Hope


“On the one hand there is an annulling of the former commandment because of its weakness and unprofitableness, for the law made nothing perfect; on the other hand, there is the bringing in of a better hope, through which we draw near to God.” Heb. 7:18-19.

We need to ask ourselves: “By which hope did they draw near to God in the first covenant?” The answer is: In the hope that their sins would be forgiven. Nevertheless, they knew that they would soon sin again. What, then, is this “better hope”? It is that I can receive forgiveness for my sins, and that I need never commit those sins again. Christ did not enter the Holy of Holies with the blood of goats and calves, but by His own blood He entered in—once for all—and obtained eternal redemption for us. Heb. 9:9-15.

The blood of Jesus is much more than the blood of goats and bulls. By His blood we receive not only forgiveness for our sins but we are set free, so that we no longer need to commit them again. The blood of bulls and goats could only sanctify to the cleansing of the flesh from sins already committed. How much more shall the blood of Christ cleanse our conscience from dead works to serve the living God! In other words, we are no longer obligated to serve sin!

Are you drawing near to God in this better hope, or do you only have the old hope? When you pray for forgiveness, are you still reckoning on committing the same sins again before long?

If the answer is “yes,” then you don’t believe that the blood of Jesus is any different than the blood of bulls and goats, “for it is not possible that the blood of bulls and goats could take away sins.” Heb. 10:4 and 11. “But now, once at the end of the ages, He has appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself.” Heb. 9:26.

In the first covenant they drew near to God in the hope of putting some things in order in accordance with His will. In the new covenant, however, we have a much better hope. Now everything can be conformed to God’s perfect will. The first covenant could not perfect the conscience of the worshipper, but the new covenant can. This is the better hope we have in the new covenant, in the blood of Jesus. “For the law, having a shadow of the good things to come, and not the very image of the things, can never with these same sacrifices, which they offer continually year by year, make those who approach perfect.” Heb. 10:1.

This is the reason why Jesus came and did away with the shadow—the sacrifices: to sacrifice His own body and do the will of God. He abolished the first and established the second. The new covenant establishes that which is perfect: namely, doing God’s will. When we enter the new covenant we forsake everything and present ourselves for obedience to the entire will of God. By thus yielding to God’s will, we become members of the body of Christ; by this will we are “sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.” Heb. 10:1-10.

Then we are baptized by one Spirit to be the body of Christ (1 Cor. 12:13), and in this Spirit we can present our bodies as a living sacrifice, holy, and acceptable to God—which is our spiritual worship. Rom. 12:1.

In the first covenant, they did not have the body of Christ; they lived in the shadow of the body. Therefore they could not serve the living God; they could only perform certain prescribed works. These works were evidence of their desire to serve God by which they consoled their consciences. We could say that these dead works were like “band-aids” for their consciences. However, Christ came with the body. Col. 2:16-17. This is why in the new covenant we have received a body with which to do God’s will.

Many people these days say that they cannot do anything, that what they do is not important. By saying this, they show that they are still living in the shadow and have not become members of the body of Christ. Most people live in dead works. When they think about serving God they think about performing certain works, such as visiting the sick, singing in the church choir, holding meetings, passing out tracts, tithing, being a Sunday school teacher, etc. On the other hand, they think it worldly to scrub floors, mend clothes, and prepare meals, etc. They do not think that such things have anything to do with “spiritual worship.” Such attitudes are reminiscent of the first covenant. Under the first covenant they were not allowed to carry on their own business, or do their own works or go their own way on the Sabbath. On that day they were to attend to the works of the Lord, but on the other six days they could attend to their own work. Ex. 20:9-10; Is. 58:13. This is merely the shadow.

However, the new covenant says the following: “And whatever you do in word or deed, do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God the Father through Him.” Col. 3:17. “Bond servants, obey in all things your masters according to the flesh, not with eyeservice, as men-pleasers, but in sincerity of heart, fearing God. And whatever you do, do it heartily, as to the Lord and not to men, knowing that from the Lord you will receive the reward of the inheritance; for you serve the Lord Christ.” Vs. 22-24.

Can a woman who complains and is ill-tempered when she does her laundry serve God by smiling sweetly when she sings in a church choir, praising God? Or can a pastor who is bitter toward his wife serve God in the pulpit or other gatherings? Is he not the same man? Do you think a clergyman is any holier when he puts on his vestments than when he is at social gatherings, smoking? Do you think that any of the works Jesus did were less holy than the others? Was not all that He did God’s will? Is not all of God’s will equally holy?

Here we see what a better hope the new covenant gives us in and through the body of Christ, as opposed to the old covenant, which only gave us the shadow. Think that our conscience can be cleansed by the blood of Christ from all these “band-aids”—these dead works—to serve the living God, whether we are doing the laundry or singing praises to the Lord; whether we are digging ditches or preaching God’s word. We are just as holy in overalls as in our Sunday best; then everything is in order. We have become members of the body of Christ. What a blessed hope the blood of the covenant has brought us to!

This was the salvation the prophets searched and inquired about. They knew that they themselves could not partake of it, yet they searched diligently in the shadow and prophesied concerning the grace that was to come with the body of Christ. 1 Pet. 1:10-12.

When we have become members of the body of Christ, it is natural for us to speak about works, about all the will of God, something that is often very annoying to those who are not in the body. However, Jesus came with a “works” Christianity, and all those who are upright rejoice in this salvation.





Redeemed From the Curse of the Law


“For as many as are of the works of the law are under the curse; for it is written, ‘Cursed is everyone who does not continue in all things which are written in the book of the law, to do them.’” Gal. 3:10.

“. . . for by the law is the knowledge of sin.” Rom. 3:20.

“Moreover the law entered that the offense might abound.” Rom. 5:20.

The law was a fitting test to see what people were capable of doing, because “. . . the law is not of faith, but ‘The man who does them shall live by them.’” Gal. 3:12.

There were many sincere souls in Israel who tried hard to live a blameless life according to the law. Nevertheless, there was always something that they neglected to do and so they knew that they were cursed. Jesus now says to such upright souls: “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” Matt. 11:28. This shows us how the law was a tutor unto Christ. Those who ignored the law did not share in the chastening by the law. They also rejected Christ. However, those who were faithful in the first covenant partook of the chastening by the law unto Christ.

“Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the law, having become a curse for us (for it is written, ‘Cursed is everyone who hangs on a tree’), that the blessing of Abraham might come upon the Gentiles in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith.” Gal. 3:13-14.

There were not many in Israel who were sufficiently humbled by the curse of the law to receive Christ. They were adamant in trying to establish their own righteousness and would not submit to the righteousness of God, which is Christ. Rom. 10:3-4. It was easier for the Gentiles who did not have a righteousness of their own to defend. They were sinners with a heathen background, but the Jews were unwilling to humble themselves that deeply, and so Jesus became a rock of offense for them. Rom. 9:30-33. They thought too highly of themselves.

Nevertheless, there were 120 souls in the upper room who had been faithful under the first covenant. They had been so deeply humbled by the law that they had no righteousness of their own to defend. They put their faith in Christ and submitted to the righteousness of God. Then they were set free from the curse of the law, and they received the Spirit, which had been promised.

What a difference that made! Instead of being under the curse they were now led by the Spirit. No wonder that people thought they were full of new wine! Now the Spirit was to accomplish the work in and through them, which the law could not do. The law could only make demands, which they had been powerless to fulfill, but now the Spirit had endued them with power from heaven. Previously they had to remember commandments and regulations; now they had become the temple of the Holy Spirit, and the Spirit was to teach them all things and bring to their remembrance all things that Jesus had told them. John 14:15-26.

Now they had received a far better hope! How much more would they, who had failed in all their striving to obey the law, obey the Holy Spirit, who would enable them to fulfill all God’s will! Previously they had hoped to fulfill a part of God’s will, but now they had received faith to do all God’s will. They had received this precious faith through the new covenant in Jesus’ blood, and they did not hesitate to enter in!

Today, many people want to rejoice in the Spirit, but they do not want to obey the Spirit. Such people have broken the covenant, for the Spirit was to lead us into all truth. There are also many people who have the understanding that in the old covenant they had to do something, but in the new covenant we don’t need to do anything, because Jesus has done it all for us. But what about the Spirit who is supposed to lead us! In the old covenant they were required to do something, yet they always fell short. In the new covenant we shall do all things and yet not fall short. The new covenant is not meant to make us worse than we were in the old covenant. “For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are sons of God.” Rom. 8:14. The Spirit leads us to do God’s will, and in the new covenant we have made a commitment to be obedient.





God’s Building


In the first covenant they repeatedly offered the same sacrifices, which could never take away sins. Heb. 10:11. In other words, there was neither growth nor progress in the first covenant; yet in the new covenant it is entirely different.

Paul writes to the Corinthians, “You are God’s temple!” And Peter writes, “Coming to Him as to a living stone, rejected indeed by men, but chosen by God and precious, you also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house . . . .” 1 Pet. 2:4-5.

Jesus is the cornerstone, the foundation stone. It was by doing God’s will that He was formed and molded to be the cornerstone. When He came into the world He said, “Behold, I have come—in the volume of the book it is written of Me—to do Your will, O God.” Heb. 10:7. We enter into the new covenant in precisely the same way. Now it is also by doing God’s will that we are molded into His image. In the volume of the book it is written about us. We are hewn by the word of God. Jesus was the Word revealed in flesh. Previously they had heard the word of God; now they could see it revealed by the body of Jesus. This is the work of the Spirit with each one of us who has entered into the new covenant.

“But we are bound to give thanks to God always for you, brethren beloved by the Lord, because God from the beginning chose you for salvation through sanctification by the Spirit and belief in the truth.” 2 Thess. 2:13. Sanctification means being transformed from being human to becoming “divine.” We can no more accomplish this by ourselves than a rock can transform itself into a statue. However, in the hands of a sculptor a block of stone can be hewn into a statue. So it is with us. We read that we are to be sanctified by the Spirit. By faith in Christ we have received the Spirit who was promised. Now all these slabs of rock that struggled in vain to transform themselves into statues, can be transformed in the Sculptor’s hands. Now they have a better hope.

Jesus is the original pattern; and by the Spirit we are being transformed into His image—into living stones. The Spirit works with us according to God’s Word so that we are conformed to such scriptures as: “Be not overcome by evil, but overcome evil with good;” “Bless, and curse not;” “Let no one seek his own good, but the good of his neighbor;” or, “He that is greatest among you shall be the servant and slave of all,” etc.

We are God’s building; therefore, if we are going to be formed into the right shape we must come to Jesus, who is the original pattern. We must not let ourselves be formed by father or mother, brother, sister, or worldly magazines. Neither must we be influenced by the spirit of the times. Come to Him, the living stone, who was rejected by men but is chosen and precious in God’s sight.

There are many builders today who are forming people to fit into their own political party or religious denomination. All of them are striving to be great and gain acceptance by contemporary society. However, we cannot fit both into heaven and on earth. We who have entered the new covenant to be formed into living stones in God’s building must accept the fact that we are going to be rejected by men.

Notice how seriously Paul regarded this: “Fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life, to which you were also called and have confessed the good confession in the presence of many witnesses. I urge you in the sight of God who gives life to all things, and before Christ Jesus who witnessed the good confession before Pontius Pilate, that you keep this commandment without spot, blameless until our Lord Jesus Christ’s appearing.” 1 Tim. 6:12-14.

What does it mean to keep the commandment without spot, and blameless? It means that we do not tailor the commandment to fit the circumstances; that my understanding of the commandment must not be defiled by the latest trends in psychology. We are to be fashioned according to the commandments—the commandments Jesus gave His disciples prior to His ascension. Acts 1:2. Stones for God’s building have been hewn throughout all ages, and they will all be joined together to be a temple when Jesus returns. Today, each one of us is being hewn—each in his own circumstances. However, the day will come when we will be joined together without the sound of a hammer, just like Solomon’s temple when it was built. The sound of an iron tool will not be heard. 1 Kings 6:7.

If God’s co-workers had tried to adapt the commandment to the prevailing trends of their day, how do you think all the stones formed throughout these nearly 2,000 years would fit together? Jesus has not changed, and the Spirit has remained the same these 2,000 years; if the commandment has been kept without spot, the stones will fit together perfectly.

Now we can understand why Paul admonishes Timothy so strongly to keep the commandment without spot until Jesus returns. He urges him in the sight of God, who gives life to all things, and before Jesus Christ, who had made the good confession. This confession was that His kingdom was not of this world. Timothy was to come to Him, the living stone; enter the covenant, and be sanctified by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. Paul reminds him that he had also made the good confession before many witnesses, that he had been baptized to seek the things that are above where Jesus is, and not the things on earth. And now he exhorts Timothy to “fight the good fight of faith, lay hold on eternal life.” Be not defiled by this present age; keep the commandment pure. Then you will be a stone that fits in God’s building when Jesus returns.

The course of world events in general and what is happening with the Jews in particular assures us that we are living in the time just before Jesus is coming again. We can say that the capstone is being formed in our time. This is the most difficult period of the entire building process. The difficulty lies in the fact that the commandment has been defiled and twisted; in fact, for the most part it has simply been explained away. Paul spoke of this time when he wrote that people will live in their sins, have a form of godliness, but deny its power. 2 Tim. 3:1-5. By this time the commandment will have been so “adapted” to the times and made so acceptable that virtually everything will be considered “Christian.” Indeed, an entire country can be called a “Christian” country, and the people believe that the gospel is shining more clearly and is being spread in more countries than ever before.

Paul continues to write about these times: “For the time will come when they will not endure sound doctrine, but according to their own desires, because they have itching ears, they will heap up for themselves teachers; and they will turn their ears away from the truth, and be turned aside to fables.” 2 Tim. 4:3-4.

Here we can see that there will be no lack of teachers. There will be hordes of them. But what of the stone they are helping to shape and give form? Alas, they have turned away from the truth and have turned aside to fables. How aptly this describes the teachers of our day. They read a word of God, and then they weave it in to many moving and entertaining stories, in order to tickle the ears of their listeners. When they write, they prefer to do it in the form of a novel, to win the approval of man for their building. But what a lamentation there will be when Jesus returns and it becomes evident that their stone does not fit into God’s building: approved by man, but rejected by God!!! Their entire work will go up in flames!

However, Christ also has His co-workers in these days. Like their Master they have been rejected by men; they are regarded as heretics and deceivers. They fight the good fight of faith and keep the commandment pure and unspotted from the current form of godliness. The stone is being formed by the Sculptor according to the commandments of Jesus Christ beneath a cover of reproach. When Jesus returns, what a joyful shout will arise as the capstone is put in place. Behold it fits!!! It was hewn and fashioned in a time of gross darkness—just prior to the revelation of the Antichrist. Zech. 4:6-7.

Therefore let us stand firm in the new covenant, in the faith and the hope that it gives us, and this great work shall take place in us. Those who are faithful co-workers with Christ on this building will by no means lose their reward. 1 Cor. 3:13-14.





God’s Field


“You are God’s field . . . .” 1 Cor. 3:9. Prior to this, we were Satan’s field. He sowed his seed in us, and it brought forth all kinds of bad fruit. However, Jesus has redeemed us to God by His blood. Rev. 5:9. We who have accepted this redemption in Christ Jesus—from the power of Satan to God—must be aware of the fact that we have entered into the new covenant. We have promised to allow no one except the Lord and His co-workers to sow in our lives. We need to wake up to the fact that we are God’s field.

This is very clear in the natural realm. Once we have purchased a plot of land nobody else has a right to sow anything on it, nor would anybody try to do so. However, Satan heeds neither laws nor personal rights. He sows wherever and whenever he gets the chance; and he uses his many, many helpers. Therefore, it is up to us to receive no other seed besides God’s Word. We need to be faithful to our covenant.

Jesus redeemed us when we were a wilderness; but the Spirit has begun to cultivate us and we must endure the chastening work of His grace which teaches us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present age. Tit. 2:11-13.

If we expose ourselves to all kinds of sowers, we will be like a highway, our heart will be unable to comprehend God’s Word, and the evil one will snatch it away. Matt. 13:19-23. Also, if I am not willing to be saved at all costs, my heart is like the stony places. If you believe you can seek that which is above and at the same time that which is on the earth, you cannot be cultivated. Isn’t this the state most believers are in? They sit in meetings where the Word is sown in their hearts. They receive it, but it never bears fruit. The cares of the world and the deceitfulness of riches choke the Word. It should be the other way around!

They want to be in the church, and they want to be cultivated by God. Jesus has also redeemed them with His blood, but they have not entered the new covenant. They have not forsaken everything; they love the world and the things of the world. All the Word of God which they receive and all the blessings they enjoy in the church becomes a curse for them. “For the earth which drinks in the rain that often comes upon it, and bears herbs useful for those by whom it is cultivated, receives blessings from God; but if it bears thorns and briars, it is rejected and near to being cursed, whose end is to be burned.” Heb. 6:7-8.

It doesn’t help just to cut off the old plant above the ground, for appearance’s sake. This is what many try to do, but the old plant keeps coming up. Every plant that has not been planted by our heavenly Father must be plucked up by the roots. In other words, you have to cut the world out of your heart. God sees your heart. He also sees the roots that lie beneath the surface. You can never get rid of the roots until you begin to live before God’s face. Then your heart will be cleansed from all the roots of the old plant, and you will be spared the effort of keeping the surface clean for the sake of appearance.

“But these are the ones sown on good ground, those who hear the word, accept it, and bear fruit: some thirtyfold, some sixty, and some a hundred.” Mark 4:20. They are faithful to the new covenant. Their hearts are not divided; they understand God’s Word. You must be wholehearted to understand God’s Word. Then the Spirit will make it living for you, and it will bear fruit in your life. This is unavoidable; you are God’s field, to His praise and glory. “By this My Father is glorified, that you bear much fruit; so you will be My disciples.” John 15:8.





Jesus’ Training for the High Priesthood


“For every high priest taken from among men is appointed for men in things pertaining to God, that he may offer both gifts and sacrifices for sins. He can have compassion on those who are ignorant and going astray, since he himself is also beset by weakness. Because of this he is required as for the people, so also for himself, to offer for sins. And no man takes this honor to himself, but he who is called by God, just as Aaron was. So also Christ did not glorify Himself to become High Priest, but it was He who said to Him: ‘You are My Son, today I have begotten You.’” Heb. 5:1-5.

We just read that every high priest taken from among men is appointed for men. This was also the case with Jesus, verse 5. “For we do not have a High Priest who cannot sympathize with our weaknesses, but was in all points tempted as we are, yet without sin.” Heb. 4:15.

You may ask: “Can it really be true that Jesus was actually tempted in all points as we are? We are in so many situations which He did not encounter, and times were different in those days!” To this question we have to pose a counter-question: “What does it mean to be tempted?” To be tempted is the same as being tested.

“My brethren, count it all joy when you fall into various trials, knowing that the testing of your faith produces patience.” James 1:2-3. “Blessed is the man who endures temptation; for when he has been proved, he will receive the crown of life which the Lord has promised to those who love Him.” Vs. 12.

These verses make it clear that to be tempted is not the same as committing sin. On the contrary, what is great is to be tempted and yet be without sin. Jesus wrought this masterful work, therefore He is truly our Master. However, we are His disciples, and so we learn how to be without sin in temptation. This is how we gain the crown of life.

He was tested just as we are. We are being tested because we have a flesh in which dwells nothing good. Rom. 7:18. We are tempted by being drawn away and enticed by our own desires. James 1:14. This is where my faith is being tested: whether I will remain firmly anchored in God’s Word and heed the voice of the Spirit, or whether I prefer to believe in my own desires. You say that you believe in God’s Word, but the desires in your flesh are testing you whether it is really true. Paul says, “. . . the life which I now live in the flesh I live by faith in the Son of God . . .” (Gal. 2:20) and not in the desires. He had crucified them. Gal. 5:24.

Jesus was tested just as we are and not in some other way. He had to be taken from among men in order to be appointed for men so He could sympathize with them and come to their aid. If He had been like God He could not have been tempted by evil. James 1:13. He renounced being like God and came in the likeness of men; He was found in appearance as a man. Phil. 2:6-8. “Inasmuch then as the children have partaken of flesh and blood, He Himself likewise shared in the same.” Heb. 2:14-18. Now He had received a flesh like we have; therefore He could also be tested in all things just like we are. “For in that He Himself has suffered, being tempted, He is able to aid those who are tempted.” Vs. 18.

Our trial is not that our spouse is a troll, or that we are either poor or rich, or that the times are so bad; our trial is that we have a flesh that cannot be obedient to God’s law. “The carnal mind is enmity against God.” Rom. 8:7. It is not neutral; it entices us and draws us away from the leading of God. If we yield, desire is conceived in our mind, and sin is born. If this sin is not acknowledged it will mature and bring forth death (James 1:14-15), and I’ll lose my connection with God.

Can a person who has experienced the baptism of the Spirit also be tempted by the desires in his flesh? Yes. According to James everybody is tempted in the same way; and we have seen it, and experienced it. But you may claim that it was either this or that which tempted you—you were tempted from without. Not at all! You would have never been tempted by these things if you didn’t have passions and desires. You have sin in the flesh, and if you do not want to acknowledge that fact you have deceived yourself and the truth is not in you. 1 John 1:8. Nevertheless, just because you have sin does not mean that you have to commit sin—that is, follow your passions and desires; because everyone who commits sin is of the devil. 1 John 3:8.

Since Jesus partook of flesh and blood like we, His trials were exactly like ours in every way. He had to undergo this schooling in order to know how weak we are, and how easily we are tempted in order to become our merciful High Priest. This gives us boldness to draw near to the throne of grace, because we know that He can give us grace to help in time of need. In time of need—so that we do not sin! He did not come to give aid to angels, but to the seed of Abraham. “Therefore in all things He had to be made like His brethren.” Heb. 2:16-17.

“Who, in the days of His flesh, when He had offered up prayers and supplications, with vehement cries and tears to Him who was able to save Him from death, and was heard because of His godly fear .” Heb. 5:7.

“For if you live according to the flesh, you will die.” Rom. 8:13. This was the death which Jesus was in danger of dying now that He had come in the flesh. All of mankind was in bondage to the flesh, and thus subject to death; it was under a curse. Salvation depended entirely on Jesus’ work. If He overcame, death would be conquered; but if He gave in to the flesh in temptation all hope would be lost. We realize that this was not a “mock battle.” He was not play-acting.

However, He was victorious! He offered Himself through the power of the eternal Spirit without spot to God. Heb. 9:14. Sin was condemned in the flesh. Rom. 8:3. He remained without sin in the hour of trial.

The priests in the old covenant were slaughterers. A priest in the new covenant is also a slaughterer. The priests in the old covenant slaughtered bulls and calves; but in the new covenant they are to slaughter sin in the flesh. Read the prophecy in Isaiah 63:1-8 regarding Jesus.

“Though He was a Son, yet He learned obedience by the things which He suffered. And having been perfected, He became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, called by God as High Priest ‘according to the order of Melchizedek.’” Heb. 5:8-10.

What a thorough schooling Jesus underwent! When He was perfected there was no more sin in the flesh to be condemned. He had fulfilled all God’s will on earth in the days of His flesh, in a body like yours and mine; and instead of sin in the flesh influencing Him, He put it to death. This is what is called “the death of Jesus” because it first took place in Him.

What a mighty work—a work done in the power of an eternal Spirit! Now the Spirit had finished His work in Jesus, and when Jesus received the Spirit from the Father He sent Him into the world on the day of Pentecost. Acts 2:33. Now the Spirit was to continue the same work in all those who entered the covenant. Those who submitted to the righteousness of Christ received the Spirit. Paul wrote: “I say then: Walk in the Spirit, and you shall not fulfill the lust of the flesh.” Gal. 5:16. What a hope this is for those who are upright, and a joy for those who are sanctified by the new covenant in Jesus’ blood.

“We judge thus: that if One died for all, then all died.” 2 Cor. 5:14. It was the same flesh. Jesus’ death put an end to all that was human, so that that which is divine could be made manifest. When I enter the new covenant and forsake everything, presenting myself unto obedience to the will of God, I am sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ. The work of Christ is imputed to me, I am included in that one sacrifice of the body of Jesus, and I receive the Spirit. I have become a member of the body of Christ, and the Spirit continues the same work in me in the days of my flesh. Because the body of Christ is to be built up! By the Spirit we can reckon ourselves dead to sin and alive to God. “Always carrying about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our body.” 2 Cor. 4:10. “But if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body, you will live.” Rom. 8:13.

Jesus is the High Priest. He has completed this sacrifice and has become our Advocate. However, we too become priests as this death of Christ (this sacrificing) takes place in our life. We are built up into a holy priesthood to offer up spiritual sacrifices. 1 Pet. 2:5. Paul was a sacrificial priest of Jesus Christ to the Gentiles, ministering as a steward the gospel of God for them. Rom. 15:16.





The Power of an Endless Life


“And it is yet far more evident if, in the likeness of Melchizedek, there arises another priest who has come, not according to the law of a fleshly commandment, but according to the power of an endless life. For He testifies: ‘You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.’” Heb. 7:15-17.

The priests in the first covenant became priests according to the law of a fleshly commandment. If they were born of the tribe of Levi and had a faultless body they had a right to be a priest. “For it is evident that our Lord arose from Judah, of which tribe Moses spoke nothing concerning priesthood.” Vs. 14. According to the flesh Jesus had no right to become a priest, but He became one on the basis of the power of an endless life.

A crown prince becomes king because he is born to become a king, but Napoleon became a king by virtue of the power of his life. In the first covenant the deciding factor was the law of a fleshly commandment, whereas in the new covenant it is the power of an endless life.

Jesus lived this life of sacrifice. It was not merely something he had learned, something He wanted to preach about, but it was something He lived. Melchizedek was without genealogy, and all the seed of Jesus according to the flesh was sacrificed through the power of this endless life—all of mankind according to the flesh that had so irreversibly corrupted its way. Therefore Jesus truly was a priest, and was confirmed with an oath. Oh, how pleasing in God’s sight this work was! “The Lord has sworn and will not relent, ‘You are a priest forever according to the order of Melchizedek.’” Heb. 7:21.

The body of Christ, which is the church, grows and develops by the power of this endless life. Every member receives his area of work. Jesus sets in the church some to this task and others to that task—according to the life they have come to by the power of this endless life. They are what they are, and nobody can change that fact. Jesus will not regret having appointed them.

This is in stark contrast to the way things are in the religious denominations today. There they become something according to the law of a fleshly commandment—as a consequence of what they are according to the flesh—and by majority vote. If a man has a good education, is a good speaker or is well-to-do, it is easy for him to gain a position or an appointment. It is easy for him to become an elder. But if one day this elder does not get his own way he asks to be relieved of his duties; or if he causes a scandal he is dismissed.

How can someone who has become an elder by virtue of his life resign his position? He is an elder; it is his life. He is a shepherd, an overseer, because he lives the life of one. Shall he stop being an overseer and a shepherd, and stop serving? Shall he begin to live a different life? Yes, he can do that if he gained the position according to the law of a fleshly commandment, but not if he became what he is according to the power of an eternal life. Jesus will not regret having appointed him to a certain ministry. What, then, can man do? In the body of Christ nobody can do anything about it, but in the denominational churches the majority can either appoint or dismiss a person at will.

Nobody can be a priest in the new covenant on the basis of his education and talents. These things are just substitutes. God’s word is sealed to the natural understanding. As high as heaven is above the earth, so are the thoughts and ways of our Lord higher than our thoughts and ways. We must come up onto these ways and into these thoughts, and we can only do that by His resurrection power. Only by this wisdom and knowledge can we serve the church of the living God.

The Bible recognizes only two priesthoods: the Levitical priesthood and the priesthood according to the order of Melchizedek. Everything else is vanity, a useless work of man.





From Master Craftsman to High Priest


“When He assigned to the sea its limit, so that the waters would not transgress His command, when He marked out the foundations of the earth, then I was beside Him, as a master craftsman; and I was daily His delight, rejoicing always before Him, rejoicing in His inhabited world, and my delight was with the sons of men.” Prov. 8:29-31. “He is the image of the invisible God, the firstborn over all creation . . . . All things were created through Him and for Him.” Col. 1:15-16.

Before He was born into the world, Jesus was God’s only begotten Son. At that time He was the master craftsman. He was before God’s face and rejoiced in His inhabited world. He envisioned all sorts of animals, creating some like this and some like that. He envisioned every kind of plant, and created them. No two leaves on a tree were made alike. We could say that He was Designer as well as Creator. He played before the Father’s face and rejoiced in His inhabited world.



This alone could not satisfy the only begotten Son. He did not consider it robbery to be equal with God; He did not want to be the sole heir. Phil. 2:6. His delight was with the sons of men. It was His desire that we should be His fellow brethren—joint-heirs with Him. For this to be possible Jesus had to become like us and consecrate a new and living way through the veil (the wall of division)—which is the flesh. Heb. 10:19-21. He had to become our High Priest, our Advocate and Mediator.



As we have already seen, in order for Jesus the master craftsman to become our High Priest, He had to undergo an intensive training—education, because being a High Priest was so much greater than being a master craftsman. He received this training in a body like ours. He had to experience life in the flesh just as we do. He voluntarily gave up being like God, and was found in fashion as a man. And when He had completed His training, which consisted of doing God’s will in a body like ours, “. . . He became the author of eternal salvation to all who obey Him, called by God as High Priest ‘according to the order of Melchizedek.’” Heb. 5:7-10. Then He was no longer the only begotten Son, but the firstborn. “You are My Son, today I have begotten You.” Heb. 1:5-6; 5:5; Rom. 8:17,29.



“Today I have begotten You.” This was the day on which He arose from the dead. This is the gospel we must proclaim, “concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.” Rom. 1:3-4; Acts 13:32-33.



The fact that God could raise Him from the dead was proof that Jesus had successfully completed His education—that He had been tempted in all points, just as we are, yet without sin. Death could have held Him if He had transgressed even in the smallest thing. But instead of the flesh gaining power over Him in temptation He overcame sin in the flesh; and when He died, He said, “It is finished!” The Just One died for us who are unjust, that He might bring us to God. 1 Pet. 3:18. It was a blameless and spotless Lamb that had been offered up, and in this blood God has established the new covenant. Through the power of the blood of the everlasting covenant God brought up from the dead that great Shepherd of the sheep. Heb. 13:20.



“The blood of an everlasting covenant.” The covenant He made when He came into the world, was: “To do Your will, O God!” He did not come to do His own will, but the will of Him who sent Him. My will is my life. It is no longer I who live when I give up my will, but He whose will I do lives in me. Gal. 2:20. In other words, Jesus had to lay down His life as the “Son of Man” so that the Father could live in Him.



When we lose our life, our blood flows. When the blood of Jesus flowed it was evidence that the covenant had been kept. By the power of the blood of this covenant the God of peace could bring up from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great Shepherd of the sheep.



“The blood of an everlasting covenant!” The first covenant was not everlasting; but the new covenant is, because it leads us to that which is perfect: doing God’s will. According to this we can understand that we cannot be sprinkled with the blood of Jesus Christ unless we first present ourselves for obedience. 1 Pet. 1:2. Then we also understand Peter’s exhortation to conduct ourselves in fear throughout the time of our sojourning, because we have been bought at a price.



Jesus is also described as our forerunner (Heb. 6:20), and since Jesus had to receive His greatest training in a body like ours, we also realize the great opportunities we have in our body. We become His brethren—joint-heirs. He was the firstborn; He is no longer the sole heir. Rom. 8:17.





Jesus as High Priest


Jesus’ first act as High Priest was to enter into heaven itself—the true sanctuary—to obtain an eternal redemption. Then the devil, Satan, who had accused the saints before God day and night, was cast down from heaven. Rev. 12:7-11; Luke 10:18. In this way Jesus cleansed the heavens by His blood, and now He stands in the presence of God—not as our accuser, but as our intercessor. Heb. 7:25; 9:11-28.

“[God] . . . make you complete in every good work to do His will, working in you what is well pleasing in His sight, through Jesus Christ.” Heb. 13:21. This describes Jesus as our Mediator. We are God’s field. Jesus has redeemed us for God by His blood. Obviously God wants to cultivate His field, and it is through Jesus Christ that He brings forth in us what is pleasing to Him.

If we take the illustration of a field, with a landowner and his manager who cultivates it for him, we can call God the “landowner” and Jesus the “manager.” The manager sits in the office with the landowner and plans the cultivation of the various plots of ground. Then he goes to work according to the landowner’s will. However, the “manager” also has many co-workers: first and foremost the Holy Spirit; secondly those whom He has placed in the church, who through obedience are being saved and trained to become “managers.” These are His brethren—sacrificial priests of the Lord Jesus Christ. But Christ Himself is the Chief Shepherd.

The manager doesn’t just have to execute the landowner’s plans; he must also produce results. We can say that the landowner wants to make a profit. “You also . . . are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.” 1 Pet. 2:5. We can see that the fruit reverts to God through Jesus Christ.

Here are some examples of spiritual sacrifices: “Therefore by Him let us continually offer the sacrifice of praise to God, that is, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name. But do not forget to do good and to share, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased.” Heb. 13:15-16. “Indeed I have all and abound. I am full, having received from Epaphroditus the things which were sent from you, a sweet-smelling aroma, an acceptable sacrifice, well pleasing to God.” Phil. 4:18. We can also say it in other words: spiritual sacrifices are the fruit of the Spirit. Gal. 5:22.

“Now this is the main point of the things we are saying: We have such a High Priest, who is seated at the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, a Minister of the sanctuary and of the true tabernacle which the Lord erected, and not man. For every high priest is appointed to offer both gifts and sacrifices. Therefore it is necessary that this One also have something to offer.” Heb. 8:1-3.

In the first covenant the priests brought not only sin and guilt offerings, but also peace offerings, burnt offerings, and gifts. Every man came with his basket full of the things with which God had blessed him. When he came with his offerings he testified before the priest of God’s goodness to him: that God had led him from the house of bondage and fulfilled all His good words to him. In other words, he testified to the fact that God had kept His part of the covenant, and now he was keeping his part, and this gave him boldness to ask for even greater blessings. Deut. 26.

“Therefore it is necessary that this One also have something to offer.” This is obvious. There has to be a result from the work the manager has expended on the land he has purchased. Everybody understands this when it concerns earthly things. It will become clear to us spiritually as well, if, using the same illustration, we read Romans 5:10 as follows: “For if when we were barren land we were purchased for the landowner, by the manager’s death, how much more, having been purchased, shall we be cultivated by His life?”

If His death produced such great results, how much greater will be the results of His life before God’s face? If He does not succeed in bringing forth fruit from us, but we bear thorns and thistles instead—the works of the flesh, Gal. 5:19—we know that wrath, seeking honor, anxiety, greed, etc., is not something our heavenly High Priest can bring as an offering. But when the landowner asks: “How is it going with the plot of land that is Demas and Diotrephes?” The manager will intercede for them and suggest new methods; perhaps then they will bear fruit.

“But now after you have known God, or rather are known by God . . . .” Gal. 4:9. The field becomes acquainted with the landowner once the manager begins to cultivate it; but it is much greater if the landowner gets to know the land by the fruits, which the manager presents to him. Rev. 3:5. He asks, “Have you harvested yet on Timothy’s land and on Demetrius’ land?” “Yes, those are valuable parcels of land on which we have to expend even more effort.” John 15:2.

You may pray to God to bless you, which is well and good; but it is far better if others can praise God for you. Some people are always so poor that they have nothing to give whether it be temporal or spiritual goods. They expect others to help them, and they have, in a way, convinced themselves that they have nothing. They are only interested in receiving. A person like that is bound to remain poor. If you would be rich, you must sow and keep on sowing. No matter how little seed a farmer has on hand, he must sow it rather than use it for bread. If he sows it, he will have plenty of bread to supply his needs later on; but if he does not sow it, he will go hungry.

If you do not give the little you have so that others will have a reason to praise God for you, you will always suffer lack no matter how much you pray. Read 2 Cor. 9:6-15. There will be abundant fruit because many will give thanks for you to God. Paul himself prayed, but he nevertheless asked the Corinthians for their help “that thanks may be given by many persons on our behalf for the gift granted to us through many.” 2 Cor. 1:11. This was extremely effectual. Now the “landowner” could easily see that His grace had not been bestowed in vain on Paul’s parcel of land. 1 Cor. 15:10.

I profess the gospel of Christ by the fruit of my life just as the plant that sprouts up shows what has been sown. 2 Cor. 9:13. It is the epistle of Christ that can be read by all men. 2 Cor. 3:2-3. Let us not dishonor our heavenly High Priest. He who reconciled us to God by His death will save us much more by His life before the Father for our sake. Let us be thankful for His work in our lives, for His chastening, so that we can be partakers of His holiness—the blessed fruits of righteousness. Heb. 12:10-14.

“. . . I chose you and appointed you that you should go and bear fruit, and that your fruit should remain, that whatever you ask the Father in My name He may give you.” John 15:16.

These blessed fruits of righteousness remain. The fruits that are presented to the Father by our heavenly High Priest will become our treasures, reserved for us in heaven, where thieves cannot break in and steal. We become rich in God. What a glorious result from a life that was lived in this sinful world.

“Therefore He is also able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through Him, since He ever lives to make intercession for them.” Heb. 7:25. Just consider how great He is, this Melchizedek—Jesus, our heavenly High Priest. Vs. 4.





So Great A Salvation


“For if the word spoken through angels proved steadfast, and every transgression and disobedience received a just reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great a salvation, which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us by those who heard Him?” Heb. 2:2-3.

Here we can see once more that the apostle compares the first covenant with the new covenant, and demonstrates to us the much greater salvation in the new covenant. We might ask: how great, then, is this salvation?

“For both He who sanctifies and those who are being sanctified are all of one, for which reason He is not ashamed to call them brethren.” Vs. 11. So great a salvation! Jesus, our heavenly High Priest, is of course the One who sanctifies, and we are the ones who are being sanctified; and He is not ashamed to call us “brethren.” When we read 1 Cor. 1:26-29, and chapter 6, verses 9-11, we can see who we are. Then we get some insight into how great salvation is. The question is, are you willing to enter the covenant; are you willing to be saved? “And the Lord added to the church daily those who were willing to be saved.” Acts 2:47. We get some insight into how they will be to the “glory of His praise”—those who had been enslaved to all kinds of lusts, but who are being sanctified, and are partaking of divine nature—by reading 2 Thess. 1:7-10. However, this scripture also tells us how it will go with those who are not faithful to the covenant. If in the old covenant they came under the curse because of disobedience, how much more so in the new covenant!

This salvation is so great that Jesus shall “present it to Himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing, but that it should be holy and without blemish.” Eph. 5:27. What a day it will be when Jesus fetches the church—those fallen souls, who were willing to be saved, to whom Jesus gave victory and whom He has sanctified. They will be found without spot or wrinkle on that day when Jesus presents all His flock before the face of His Father, saying, “Here am I and the children whom God has given Me.” Heb. 2:13.

Salvation is so great that we shall sit together with Jesus on His throne, just as He Himself sat down with the Father on His throne. Rev. 3:21. “For He has not put the world to come, of which we speak, in subjection to angels. But one testified in a certain place, saying: ‘What is man that You are mindful of him, or the son of man that You take care of him?’” Heb. 2:5-6.

Salvation is so great that the world to come will be put in subjection to people whom Jesus has sanctified. All these people stopped talking about this world. They gave it up when they entered the new covenant and then they started to speak about the world to come. Is this the way it is in your family when you are gathered with your children around the table, when you go about your daily business, when you lie down and when you rise up? This was a requirement in the old covenant; how much more so in the new covenant! Deut. 6:6-9.

You must be willing to be saved if you are going to be saved. If you are, then you will have a “manager”—a High Priest—who is able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through Him. Heb. 7:25.





When Do You Break The Covenant?


God knew that under the first covenant the people could not keep everything that was written in the book of the law. Therefore He ordained the various sacrifices and offerings for the forgiveness of sins. When they transgressed the commandments they were to bring sin offerings and guilt offerings. Every transgression cost them something—a bull or a goat that was without blemish, or some other animal. There was the great Day of Atonement which took place just once a year when the high priest went into the Holy Place to atone for all the sins of the people, both conscious and unconscious.

All these sacrifices were but a shadow of the true sacrifice, which Jesus would bring. Before Jesus came they continued with these “shadow offerings,” which could never take away sins or transform lives. However, through these confessions they lived in a state of acknowledgment and expectation, and matured to receive the new covenant.

As long as they were true to the covenant they grieved over their transgressions, faithfully brought offerings, and attended diligently to worship. But when they violated the covenant, they no longer grieved over their sins. They no longer strove to keep the law, and they were no longer careful to choose animals without blemish for their sacrifices. When it was really bad with them, they sacrificed to idols.

But God was faithful, even though they were faithless. 2 Tim. 2:12-13. Then He was true to the covenant and let all the curses come over them, banishing them from the land. It is precisely the same in the new covenant.

Falling in sin is not a transgression of the covenant, but committing sin is. John writes, “My little children, these things I write to you, that you may not sin.” In other words, that is the norm. This is the salvation in the new covenant to which they could not attain in the first covenant. “And if anyone sins, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And He Himself is the propitiation for our sins.” 1 John 2:1-2. But not unless I am true to the covenant, which means that I confess and am absolutely determined never to do it again.

If I have obligated myself to pay a man a certain sum of money each month, and one month I am unable to do so, I can approach the man and explain my predicament, and I have not broken the agreement. He notices my sorrow, and will readily understand that I have not deliberately breached the contract. I was simply not able to abide by the terms. He forgives me and gives me more time. But suppose I think, “That was easy. Why should I strive with making the payments on time when he is so kind and gladly forgives me?” Next time, when I ask for his forgiveness he will notice my lack of sorrow. Then I have broken the covenant, and he will let the curse come over me. God looks at the heart, so He knows whether you have broken the covenant or not. We can say that the first time I fell into sin; the second time I committed sin. John writes, “He who commits sin is of the devil [Norw. Trans.].” 1 John 3:8.

Sin is lawlessness—when I act contrary to the light I have. “He was manifested to take away our sins, and in Him there is no sin.” 1 John 3:4-6. Jesus never broke the law. He Himself was without sin, and now He has been revealed to put an end to our transgressions. He is fully able to accomplish the work He came to do in all those who are willing.

The law of sin is activated when you fall in temptation. Then you need to humble yourself so that the law of death is not activated. When sin is full-grown it brings forth death. This means that if you do not acknowledge your sin and do not sorrow over it, it will not be cleansed away. The blood of the covenant testifies of this. The fruit will remain and it will mature—it will bring forth death. You have broken the covenant, and sin separates you from God. Jas. 1:14-15.

The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has made us free from the law of sin and death. Rom. 8:2. Therefore, “Whoever abides in Him does not sin.” 1 John 3:6. However, if you love the world and the things in the world, you cannot help but commit sin, and then the love of the Father is not in you. “Little children, let no one deceive you.” 1 John 3:7. “Keep yourselves from idols.” 1 John 5:21.

In other words, to those people under the first covenant who tried their best, who grieved over their sins and kept the covenant, Jesus said, “Come to Me, all you who labor and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest.” All the others had broken the covenant and were not fit to enter this new covenant.

It is just the same today. All those who do not grieve over their transgressions—their sins—are not fit for the new covenant. Either they have never entered into the new covenant or they have broken it. Jesus cannot save them and give them rest.





Elect—Responsibility


“Elect according to the foreknowledge of God the Father, in sanctification of the Spirit, for obedience and sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ.” 1 Pet. 1:2.

To be elect to enter into the new covenant is such great grace that we as human beings cannot fully comprehend its significance. But we can understand something of it when we consider the Jewish people. They were the Egyptians’ slaves, and despised as shepherds. Gen. 46:34. Yet God elected them, and led them out with a mighty hand and entered the first covenant with them and exalted them high above all the other nations He had made—to His praise, renown, and honor, that they might be a holy people for the Lord their God. Deut. 26:19.

What a glorious election! What wonderful opportunities and blessings were opened up to them through their covenant with God, as long as they remained faithful to it. And yet it should also be obvious that it will go badly with a people—even worse for them than for other nations —who despise the covenant, even though God has done such great things for them. Amos 3:1-2.

Nevertheless, it is far greater to be elected by God to enter into the new covenant. We have already covered this a little bit in the preceding chapters. But what shall we say when you have entered the new covenant and been enlightened, have tasted the heavenly gift, have partaken of the Holy Spirit, have tasted the good word of God and the powers of the age to come, and then fall away? Heb. 6:4-9. It is very important for the apostle to make this serious for us; therefore he writes: “For if we sin willfully after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there no longer remains a sacrifice for sins, but a certain fearful expectation of judgment, and fiery indignation which will devour the adversaries. Anyone who has rejected Moses’ law dies without mercy on the testimony of two or three witnesses. Of how much worse punishment, do you suppose, will he be thought worthy who has trampled the Son of God underfoot, counted the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified a common thing, and insulted the Spirit of grace?” Read Heb. 10:26-31.

Oh, how we need to emphasize this apostolic seriousness, which has practically been done away with in our times! There are innumerable backsliders these days; yet it is doubtful whether any of them have ever been enlightened—that is, whether they have ever understood that there was a covenant to enter into. They have only heard about the forgiveness of sins, not about the covenant.

It is also doubtful whether any of them have really come to know the truth. “And you shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free.” John 8:32. In other words, they must have had victory over sin. But if someone has tasted of this life, and then deliberately turns to a life of sin, what kind of an attitude does such a person have? Such a person has trampled God’s Son underfoot, profaned the blood of the covenant by which he was sanctified, and insulted the Spirit of grace. Indeed, it goes far worse with such people than with the Jews, since they have been sanctified by blood that is more precious.

Jesus is coming soon, and the time of grace will soon be over—the time in which Jesus is our High Priest. Soon He will come to take vengeance on all those who do not know God, and have been disobedient to the gospel. Therefore it is high time for us to enlighten people concerning the inheritance, which Jesus by His death has entitled us to in the new covenant.

You who have an ear to hear, who grieve over your sin: you have been elected to be obedient. Jesus is your Savior if you obey Him. Enter into the covenant with great boldness. Present yourself for obedience, and be sanctified in the new covenant by the sprinkling of the blood of Christ. Then you have a good future ahead of you. Oh, what blessings you will share, for time and eternity! “Be saved from this perverse generation!” Acts 2:40.

Those who are taken up in the rapture, who become Jesus’ bride, will never regret having been born into this world. They will praise God for all eternity because He let them be born into the world, and for the opportunities this gave them.





The Mystery of Lawlessness


“For the mystery of lawlessness is already at work; only He who now restrains will do so until He is taken out of the way.” 2 Thess. 2:7.

What is the mystery behind the progress and success of lawlessness, which makes it possible for the “man of sin,” the lawless one, to be revealed and gain power over all mankind? The mystery is that the new covenant in Jesus’ blood is explained away. This mystery was already active in Paul’s time and it has been at work relentlessly ever since then. It has never been as active as in these days, and soon people will have matured to receive the man of sin.

Everybody can examine himself now and see to what extent he has been defiled by lawlessness. When you read, “For this is My blood of the new covenant, which is shed for many for the remission of sins,” have you read something about a covenant that binds two parties? I wonder if you haven’t read it like this: “This is My blood, which is shed for many for the remission of sins”? It is the mystery of lawlessness that has affected you so much that you are totally ignorant of the covenant. Only after the corruption comes from the sanctuary does it gain such power that all the people are destroyed. That is why the prophet was to set his face toward Jerusalem and preach against the holy places, and prophesy against the land of Israel. Ezek. 21:2. When God set out to punish, He began at the sanctuary; and He began with the elders, for they were responsible for the younger generation. Ezek. 9:4-10. Nevertheless, He put a mark upon the foreheads of those who sighed and groaned over all the lawless abominations, and spared them.

“Beloved, while I was very diligent to write to you concerning our common salvation, I found it necessary to write to you exhorting you to contend earnestly for the faith which was once for all delivered to the saints. For certain men have crept in unnoticed, who long ago were marked out for this condemnation, ungodly men, who turn the grace of our God into licentiousness and deny the only Lord God and our Lord Jesus Christ.” Jude 3-4.

Here we see how and where the mystery of lawless began. Ungodly men crept into the apostolic assemblies and began their destructive work. When we read the letters to the seven churches we see that the corruption had already become widespread in the days of the apostles. How are things then today?

Notice how cunning and deceptive their work was: “. . . ungodly men who turn the grace of our God into licentiousness.” God has given us an inexpressibly great grace in and by His Son, Jesus Christ. Indeed, those ungodly preachers preached about this great grace, but they simply kept quiet about the condition for receiving this grace—that they needed to repent! They spoke warmly about the love of Jesus for a fallen world, about His death for sinners. Now the worst sinners could come as they were and receive salvation without works. All this was indeed true, and they glorified both Jesus and God, but not many people noticed the things that they kept quiet about.

The apostle calls them “ungodly.” Yes, those who have sins on their conscience are quite capable of explaining that “where sin abounded, grace abounded much more.” But Paul opposed lawlessness vigorously, and he wrote: “Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Certainly not!” But then these ungodly people came along, preaching how wonderful it was that Jesus had fulfilled the law in our stead and redeemed us from the curse of the law, so that we are no longer under the law but under grace. They simply kept quiet about the conditions! But Paul saw through all that, and he wrote: “What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Certainly not!” Read Rom. 6:1-2 and 15. Then he proceeds to explain the new covenant.

It was easy for Paul to see what all this was leading to, and he made it plain that after his departure wolves would arise from among them, speaking perverse things to draw away the disciples after them. Acts 20:29-31. Do you have an ear to hear? Can you recognize these preachers of lawlessness, who speak so glowingly about God’s promises, about His grace and about the blood, yet say nothing about the conditions? Where are they who are supposed to restrain the mystery of lawlessness?

Those who crept in during the time of the apostles have now become large, officially recognized and accepted denominations, “organized according to the biblical pattern.” In fact, they have organized things so well that those who would restrain lawlessness are not given any liberty to speak. In apostolic times there was no such thing as church enrollment, so they had no need of membership cards. Since then Satan has done a thorough work of organizing. Jesus’ words in this regard are very fitting: “If therefore the light that is in you is darkness, how great is that darkness!”





Unscriptural Expressions


The word “harlot” is the scriptural expression for lawlessness. Its opposite is the term “bride.” Many expressions are being used that are completely unscriptural, but which the harlot has so impressed upon people that they accept them as scriptural; and when you point these out to them, they get furious and cry out in alarm, just like the silversmiths in Ephesus did in former times. Acts 19:28.

There are three expressions in particular that the harlot has managed to make people believe are biblical, and with these she bewitches them. They are: “At the foot of the cross,” “under the blood,” and “the finished work of Calvary.” Where do we find the apostles using expressions like these in their preaching? They sound so innocent and true; but since they are not biblical, you may rest assured that there is an underlying lawlessness in them—and to a frightening degree, at that! If in this area we could put the lamp firmly in the lampstand so that it might shine for everyone in the house, then the harlot—the mystery of lawlessness—would be shaken to her very foundations.

The harlot sings and speaks about coming to the foot of the cross, where full salvation can be found. “He died for us so that we might not have to.” Can you not hear the tone and the spirit of the mystery of lawlessness in all these fine-sounding words? Can you see how the covenant in the blood of Jesus is being erased?

Now you shall hear the apostolic preaching: “Who Himself bore our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, having died to sins, might live for righteousness—by whose stripes you were healed.” 1 Pet. 2:24. “I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live, but Christ lives in me.” Gal. 2:20. “And those who are Christ’s have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.” Gal. 5:24. “But God forbid that I should glory except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world has been crucified to me, and I to the world.” Gal. 6:14.

Can you hear how the new covenant is emphasized in the preaching of the apostles? Can you rejoice in it, or does it make you indignant and evil? Continue to listen to the apostolic preaching, and how clearly the apostles emphasize the new covenant. The concept “At the foot of the cross” doesn’t exist in their preaching.

“This is a faithful saying: ‘For if we died with Him, we shall also live with Him. If we endure, we shall also reign with Him. If we deny Him, He also will deny us. If we are faithless, He remains faithful; He cannot deny Himself.’” 2 Tim. 2:11-13.

But the harlot knows how to take care of such clear scriptures in order to do away with the new covenant. She says, “It is a good thing that He is faithful, even though we are unfaithful.” With these few words she has bewitched the people, making them think that they will live with Him without dying with Him, that He shall not deny them even if they should deny Him, because all this is covered by the grace that is in Jesus. Can you recognize the voice behind all this?

If we are unfaithful and deny Him, He is not unfaithful to acknowledge us in spite of that. Not at all; He abides resolutely by the covenant, and we will experience that He will deny us. Compare this with Jesus’ words in Mark 8:38.

Just as God has kept His covenant with the Jews in the old covenant and let the curse come upon them when they were unfaithful, so the apostle, as we have previously seen, makes it quite clear that the same thing is no less true of the new covenant.

Let us look at the expression “under the blood.” An explanation that I have heard at least two “pastors” use, expresses what is meant by it: “Suppose a stone, lying in a brook, gets dirty; the running water will wash it clean immediately. Thus the stone will always be clean.” But in this illustration the dirt would have had to come with the water. But is there any dirt in the blood of Jesus? This is just an illustration, yet notice how contrary it is to what Peter writes: “And if you call on the Father, who without partiality judges according to each one’s work, conduct yourselves throughout the time of your sojourning here in fear, knowing that you were not redeemed with corruptible things, like silver or gold, from your aimless conduct received by tradition from your fathers, but with the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot.” 1 Pet. 1:17.

Only if we walk in the light, does the blood of Jesus, God’s Son, cleanse us from all sin. 1 John 1:7. You cannot stand under the blood as you would under a waterfall. When the Israelites applied blood to the doorposts, they could not stay in Egypt and rely on the blood. No, they were commanded to leave in haste. Ex. 12:7-14. Only two of those who were more than twenty years old entered the Promised Land.

We often hear the phrase, “The finished work of Calvary is sufficient!” Most people assume that it was on Calvary that the work of Jesus first took place. Did He not do a work in Nazareth? Perhaps we should even call it the “work of Nazareth”? “But He died for us on Calvary,” you say. Yes, but the thieves died there too. Jesus’ death on Calvary would not have been of any benefit for us whatsoever if He had not watched and prayed and done the Father’s will all His life. Jesus inaugurated a new and living way. He had learned obedience, and was perfected. He left steps for us to walk in. He was tempted as we are, yet He was without sin. He finished His work on Calvary. There He was offered up as a blameless lamb.

“But then there can’t be anything wrong in calling it ‘the work of Calvary,’” you say. Just be careful that the spirit of lawlessness does not deceive you. Isn’t it best to be on the safe side and keep to the expressions the apostles used?

Wherever you go you hear mostly about Jesus’ death on Calvary. You seldom hear about His resurrection—except on Easter Sunday! Yet it is through the resurrection of Jesus from the dead that we are born again to a living hope. 1 Pet. 1:3. Of what significance would His death have been to us if He had not risen again? Then we would still be in our sins! 1 Cor. 15:17. That is why the apostles put the greatest emphasis in their preaching on Jesus’ resurrection, and only mention Jesus’ death occasionally—which is the exact opposite of what we hear in our days.

This shift of emphasis is also a fruit of the mystery of lawlessness. In Jude’s epistle we read that they denied Jesus Christ as their only Lord and Master. Many want to have Jesus as their atoning sacrifice but not as their Lord. Don’t be deceived! If you are not willing to have Him as Lord, then neither can you have Him as an atonement however much you claim “the finished work of Calvary.”

“As you have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk in Him.” Col. 2:6. He can only save those who obey Him. Heb. 5:9.





Is Christ a Minister of Sin?


“But if, while we seek to be justified by Christ, we ourselves also are found sinners, is Christ therefore a minister of sin? Certainly not!” Gal. 2:17. One might think so, since He justifies the ungodly. We can say that Jesus keeps the one who has broken the law “under cover,”[1] as it were, so that the curse does not touch him. Gal. 3:10-13.

However, if the authorities are searching for a lawbreaker, and I shelter him, yet he continues to break the law, then I am a minister or servant of sin. This is precisely how Jesus is preached! The harlot makes Him a minister of sin. People glorify Jesus as the One who covers them, yet they continue to sin, talking about “the finished work of Calvary is sufficient . . . under the blood . . . come to the foot of the cross . . . we are under grace . . . etc.” In other words they are saying, “We may be sinners but the covering is sufficient! Jesus is our righteousness.”

“Certainly not!” writes Paul. Christ is not a minister of sin! If a lawbreaker seeks refuge with me and I make a covenant with him to give him shelter and handle his case on the condition that he obeys me in everything, that is another matter altogether; because by taking him “under cover” I can help him make amends for his transgressions, so that he can begin to live a new life. In this case I am not a minister of sin. On the contrary. Had I not sheltered him, the curse would have caught up with him and he would have had to die. This would not have benefited anybody in contrast to the result that can now be achieved. Had there been nobody to help him to a new life, it would have been a glory that such a person had been done away with. However, if the ministry of condemnation had glory, the ministry of righteousness exceeds much more in glory. 2 Cor. 3:6-10.

Before Christ there was nobody who could shelter us. But now He has redeemed us from the curse of the law, and we must remember that He is not a minister of sin. When He extends His “covering” to you, He makes a covenant with you. You must agree to obey Him in everything. Then the grace that is in Christ Jesus will cover you. It will not only cover you, but it will also teach you to live an entirely new life. Read Titus 2:11-15.

He does not save you because of your good works. You are a lawbreaker, and salvation is a gift. “For we are His workmanship, created in Christ Jesus for good works . . . .” Eph. 2:8-10. He shall have the glory for the work; it is He who “protected” us. Old things have passed away, and all things have become new. 2 Cor. 5:17.

Does this help you to distinguish between the harlot’s preaching of Jesus as a minister of sin and the apostles’ preaching of Him as a minister of righteousness? The harlot’s chief concern is that the covering may be sufficient, whereas the apostles’ chief concern is that we are obedient to Him who “covers” us. If we are obedient we don’t have to be concerned about the covering.

“For if I build again those things which I destroyed, I make myself a transgressor.” Read Galatians 2:18. Paul “destroyed” the law as a means of justification. The law, with its curse, could only lead me to Christ. The Galatians had experienced this, and they rejoiced in the justification that was in Christ Jesus. But now there were some who came along and wanted to put them under the law again. They believed that they had to keep the law if there was to be any improvement in their lives.

This is precisely what the harlot does in the various denominations. There the people hear that they can come as they are and be saved by grace alone. Nevertheless, they do understand that they cannot continue to live the way they did before because then the covering would not shield them from the eyes of people, even though they believe that Jesus covers them before God. Consequently they put these new converts under the law by giving them various commandments such as: You must not drink, go dancing, play cards, steal, swear, etc. These rules and regulations vary with the different denominations. They argue about whether it is sin to smoke, go to the movies, for women to have their hair permed, and cut their hair, etc. But getting offended, vanity, love of money, anger, respect of persons, etc., is hardly ever mentioned. The question is: what can one do or what can one not do and still be considered a Christian—so that the covering might be sufficient. They are mostly concerned with what people think, and they say, “Jesus is our righteousness before God; then we are ‘under the blood’ both with respect to the past and the future, and ‘ the finished work of Calvary’ is sufficient; so there is nothing at all to fear.”

What was it that those who wanted to put the Galatians under the law again did not understand? And what is it that Christianity today does not understand? It is the dying of Christ, which we are to bear about in our bodies. People are only invited to come to the foot of the cross, but Paul says, “I have been crucified with Christ; it is no longer I who live . . . .” Gal. 2:20.

“. . . Being conformed to His death.” Phil. 3:10. The dying of Christ, as we have stated previously, is dying to sin in the flesh. Then what about smoking, vanity, anger, getting offended, being conformed to this world, “great, greater, greatest . . . .”? When I die, what becomes of all discussion about what is sin and what is not sin? Then all the old things disappear, and a new life appears. “For if we have been united together in the likeness of His death, certainly we also shall be in the likeness of His resurrection.” Rom. 6:5. “Likewise you also, reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord.” Vs. 11.

All this makes us realize that these unbiblical expressions are not as innocent as they appear on the surface. They make Christ a minister of sin, and one will never be set free from the law. Because you have not died with Christ, you will always have to be fenced in with rules and regulations: “Do not touch, do not taste, do not handle.” Col. 2:20-21.





The Faith that was Delivered to the Saints


What is this faith? Briefly stated, it is this: “He is also able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through Him, since He ever lives to make intercession for them.” Heb. 7:25. He can take away sins by His sacrifice!

Now the time of reformation has come—the time for putting all things in order! This faith has been delivered to the saints. It has been given to them in the new covenant because they have been sanctified by the sprinkling of the blood of Jesus Christ. When Jude was “very diligent” to write to them he considered it necessary to exhort them to contend for this faith because those who had crept in unnoticed wanted to seize it from them. The mystery of lawlessness has also been extremely successful in this. Jesus had good reason to say, “When the Son of Man comes, will He really find faith on the earth?” Luke 18:8.

Those who only want a “covering” and do not want to obey, obviously are not interested in being saved to the uttermost, or for all things to be put in order. For them this faith is a judgment over their lives, something to avoid at all cost. Those who preach lawlessness have even managed to persuade people that it is pride to believe in victory! If anyone today who has tasted of salvation in the new covenant should say with Paul, “But thanks be to God, who [always] gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ,” he would be looked upon as a proud, self-righteous person. Either that, or they would reply, “Of course, that was in Christ, it was not Paul.” By saying this they have in a mysterious way robbed you of your faith; all you are left with is the understanding that Paul only meant a “covering,” and not personal victory.

Or if you should say, “Follow me, as I follow Jesus,” the retort would be, “Paul could say that, but we had better just crawl to the cross.” Or if you quote the scripture, “Not that I have already attained, or am already perfected, but I press on . . .,” they will reply, “Yes, we are to press on to perfection, but we will never actually attain it.” Or if you should quote to them, “That you may be perfect and complete, lacking nothing,” they will reply, “Yes, the Scriptures do say that, but have you ever known anyone who was perfect?”

Notice that as soon as you begin to speak in that faith which was once for all delivered to the saints, you encounter violent resistance from the harlot. You are branded as someone who rejects both grace and the blood and attempts to be saved by his own works. Almost everybody succumbs to this influence of lawlessness.

However, Paul has taught us how to recognize these lawless wolves. “Remember that for three years I did not cease to warn everyone night and day with tears.” “I have coveted no one’s silver or gold or apparel.” Read Acts 20:30-35.

These lawless pastors and evangelists certainly know how to weep and plead with you to come under the covering of grace; yet afterwards they are not genuinely interested in whether you get victory or become a new creation, as long as you keep certain commandments they give you in order to keep you from falling into open scandal. As long as you practice tithing you are considered an excellent church member. If you come to them, bemoaning your lack of victory, and seek their counsel, they simply reply, “You must not look at yourself; just look at Jesus. He is your righteousness. The work of Calvary is sufficient, brother!” Then these hirelings let it go at that. And if you come with exhortations, they exclaim, “Preach Christ! Surely we are not to help God with our salvation, are we? Salvation is complete and free. Hallelujah!”

Compare today’s preaching with the apostles’ approach, and perhaps you will get a clearer vision, and be liberated from this mystery of lawlessness before it is too late. Consider these scriptures:

“Him we preach, warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom, that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus.” Col. 1:28.

“Finally, brethren, farewell. Become complete. Be of good comfort, be of one mind.” 2 Cor. 13:11.

“Epaphras, who is one of you, a servant of Christ, greets you, always laboring fervently for you in prayers, that you may stand perfect and complete in all the will of God.” Col. 4:12.

“That the man of God may be complete, thoroughly equipped for every good work.” 2 Tim. 3:17.

Can you see how the faith of the new covenant shines with crystal clarity through the apostles’ messages, exhortations, and words of comfort? We could go on quoting similar scriptures at great length. But can you also see the necessity of contending for the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints? Never before was this exhortation more fitting: “But you, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, looking for the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life.” Jude 20-21.

Here is another example: “For I know that in me (that is, in my flesh) nothing good dwells; for to will is present with me, but how to perform what is good I do not find. For the good that I will to do, I do not do; but the evil I will not to do, that I practice.” Rom. 7:18-19.

Those who do not want to hear about victory over sin grasp at verses such as these, saying, “How can we be any better than Paul?” But they don’t even bother to understand the context in which Paul wrote these words. Paul did not say that nothing good dwelt in him, but it was in his flesh that nothing good dwelt. On the other hand, Paul writes much about all the good that dwells in us—everything to which we have been saved by our precious faith. Philemon 6; Rom. 15:14; Phil. 1:11.

In Romans 7 Paul does not speak about conscious sin, but about sanctification—going from light to light. He says, “For what I am doing, I do not understand.” Vs. 15. “Now if I do what I will not to do, it is no longer I who do it, but sin that dwells in me.” Vs. 20. When you lie, lose your temper, or get offended, you cannot say, “I do not understand what I am doing, it is not I who do it but sin that dwells in me.” Not at all! You know very well what you are doing. Sin, which dwells in you—in your flesh—has found a place in your heart. Now it is you who are offended, etc. You are serving sin, not only with your flesh, but also with your mind. Paul did not do this. Vs. 25. However, in those areas where he lacked light, sin in the flesh asserted itself, and he saw in a greater light that he had done things that he hated, deeds that he never condoned with his mind. He calls these “the deeds of the body,” and he put them to death by the Spirit. Rom. 8:13. But if you deliberately do those things which you know to be sin, then you are a servant of sin; you have no right at all to compare yourself with Paul in Romans 7. However, you will be saved from your bondage to sin through the faith that was once for all delivered to the saints, and you will become a servant of God. Rom. 6:22. We must believe more in the power of grace and the blood than in the power of sin and Satan. Rom. 5:17.

It is not written in the Scriptures that the children of God are sinners. On the contrary! “He who sins is of the devil.” 1 John 3:8-10.

Let your light shine, and contend earnestly for the faith in the new covenant that has been delivered to the saints.





Signs and Wonders


Many people realize that neither Catholicism nor the State Church [2] are what they ought to be. Therefore we have many assemblies which, taken as a whole, could be called “free churches.” They have left the official, state-supported system and are financially independent. And yet most of these churches have essentially retained the same system as the State Church. They have a paid “pastor” who is in charge of everything. Then there are deacons and elders, who are occasionally permitted to open and close the worship service. Their primary responsibility, however, is the church finances—the business side of things. The pastor and guest preachers take almost complete charge of the spiritual side of things. Their organization “according to the biblical pattern” does not remind us of true liberty or the Spirit’s leading!

It is no easy task, however, to be the “pastor” of such an assembly. They have to speak in such a way that they attract many people and large collections. It is also their task to stir up revival and life. In recent years this routine has become harder and harder to keep up. What they term revival and spiritual life is on the decline. To help make up for this, they have begun to preach about that Great Revival which is to come before Jesus comes again. To keep their assemblies from realizing how dead things are, they have filled their minds with great expectations of glorious times to come, a time of signs and wonders, revival, and finally, the rapture.

One of the best known preachers recently stated to an audience of several thousand people: “I want to prepare this assembly for a period of signs and wonders.” This is unsettling to those who are familiar with what the apostles wrote about the end times—the time just before the lawless one is revealed. Just such a time is coming, but it is the deception of Satan; and God shall send them strong delusion, so that they will believe a lie. Read 2 Thess. 2:9-13. This is the result of a misguided emphasis on signs and wonders instead of on sanctification.

Among the so-called independent assemblies many souls have earnestly sought the fullness of the Spirit in order to live a life of victory, but the spirit of lawlessness has drawn them away from this noble longing to side issues. For the majority of such people, signs and wonders and the baptism of the Spirit have become the main thing, and a life in Jesus’ steps has been utterly displaced. Healing, in particular, through the laying on of hands, has become the big attraction. For them it is the gifts, and not the fruit, that determines whether the tree is good or bad. For many, that which was to confirm the gospel has itself become the gospel. The reason for this is human vanity, the lust for prominence and the spectacular—not a love for the sick!

Satan tried to deceive Jesus in exactly this way, when he tempted Him at the beginning of His public ministry. He tried to get Him to perform signs and wonders. Jesus possessed the gift to do that, and He could have won all the glory of this world—but He was not deceived. He had not come to perform signs and wonders, but to save people from their sins. Therefore Jesus began to preach and say, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand.” Matt. 4:17. You may ask, “Aren’t the gifts part of the kingdom of heaven?” Yes, but most of the gifts—for example the gifts of healing and prophecy—were also part of the Law in the first covenant. When they kept the law, God promised to remove all sickness from their midst. These spiritual gifts belong to the earthly glory they received in advance, and they are also valuable to us now in our earthly pilgrimage. 1 Cor. 1:7. However, when God creates a new heaven and a new earth, the gifts will pass away.

Jesus sent out the twelve disciples, and also the seventy, giving them power to heal and drive out evil spirits, and He told them to proclaim, “The kingdom of God has come near to you.” Luke 10. It had not yet come, but they had received a foretaste of it and were able to perform signs and wonders which, for the seventy, was the source of their joy. They had already gone astray, and Jesus reproved them; but they eventually forsook Him, anyway.

When did the kingdom of God come, then? On the day of Pentecost. That is how near it was. Jesus had it within Him, and in this sense it had come right to them. But only when the Spirit was poured out could the gospel concerning this great salvation be preached by which we can be blessed with all spiritual blessings in the heavenly places in Christ. Eph. 1:3. Signs and wonders are not the gospel, but they confirm the gospel.

Paul was “called to be an apostle, separated to the gospel of God which He promised before through His prophets in the Holy Scriptures, concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord, who was born of the seed of David according to the flesh, and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead.” Rom. 1:1-4.

The gospel is the good news that death has been abolished and that, in its place, life and immortality have been brought to light. 2 Tim. 1:10. If Jesus had come to earth as an angel—or like Adam before the Fall—died and was resurrected, this would not have given me any hope. But since, according to the flesh, He was descended from David and could still rise from the dead, then this is a gospel for me. His was the same flesh as mine and so I too have hope, if I follow Him. Heb. 2:14-18.

“Remember that Jesus Christ, of the seed of David, was raised from the dead according to my gospel.” 2 Tim. 2:8. The gospel about Jesus! When Paul received the knowledge of Jesus, he counted everything else as rubbish. Then he had the hope of attaining to the resurrection from the dead by being conformed to His death. Phil. 3:8-11.

We need powerful revival to expose the mystery of lawlessness, which deceives people to rejoice in signs and wonders instead of rejoicing in the gospel, which is able to transform us so that we cease to live as mere men, and rather become partakers of divine nature. 1 Cor. 3:3. Therefore, read the message of the apostles which is sanctification; they almost never mention signs and wonders.

Let us take an example: Supposing your wife is paralyzed, this would naturally bring you and your family into great need. If somebody came to visit you who had the gift of raising her up through faith, we all realize what a great glory this would be. But this is only an earthly glory. If your wife were healed yet did not have victory over vanity, being offended, or getting angry, there wouldn’t be much of the kingdom of heaven in her home. There are many marriages that testify to this.

But the new and living way that Jesus consecrated goes through the veil, that is, His flesh—the flesh of David. Heb. 10:19-20. On this way sin in the flesh is put to death, and divine nature takes its place. 2 Pet. 1:4. Then the kingdom of heaven will reign in your home, even if there is sickness in the family. And if you should be sick when Jesus comes again, you will not be left behind on account of that. However, if you were healed and continued to get offended and be vain, you can be certain that you will be left behind.

This shows us how the mystery of lawlessness uses any and every means to try and turn people’s attention from what really counts: sanctification—the new covenant in Jesus’ blood—and to focus on nonessentials.

Even before the day of Pentecost there was much healing and casting out of evil spirits, but they could not be transformed from being carnal, or human, to being spiritual, or partaking of divine nature before the Spirit had been poured out. That could only take place after the day of Pentecost.

Yet even before the day of Pentecost there was such power in the name of Jesus that one who believed in Jesus’ name cast out evil spirits in that name, even though he was not one of the disciples. Mark. 9:38. How much more then would one be able to do this after Jesus was glorified! Many such believers will come on that day and say, “Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in Your name, cast out demons in Your name, and done many wonders in Your name?” Then Jesus will say to them, “I never knew you; depart from Me, you who practice lawlessness!” Matt. 7:22-23. These have not followed Jesus on the narrow way that leads to life, so Jesus did not know them as His brothers. Yet they had faith in His name, and had been interested in the signs and wonders that were to confirm the gospel, but they didn’t want to have anything to do with the gospel itself—the new covenant.

When the subject of doing God’s will comes up, harlot preachers cry out in alarm: “We can do nothing in our own strength!” Yet these same preachers are not afraid of using their own strength to work up the emotions of their hearers, to appeal for money, and to perform signs and wonders.

May God in His mercy expose this hypocrisy so that those who are upright can be rescued before it is too late.





Conclusion


It is difficult to understand the age in which we are now living. It is easier for us to understand what they should have done in the days of Noah, or in the days of Jesus, or in the days of Hans Nilsen Hauge.[3] This agrees with what Jesus says in Matthew 23:29-30: “Woe to you, scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites! Because you build the tombs of the prophets and adorn the monuments of the righteous, and say, ‘If we had lied in the days of our fathers, we would not have been partakers with them in the blood of the prophets.’”

Noah alone understood the corruption of his day, and there were not many who saw through the hypocrisy in Jesus’ days. Jesus could say, “Beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy.” Luke 12:1. Hardly anyone else could say this, since, on the surface, the Pharisees did appear to be righteous before men. They were the leading religious authorities of their day, and sat on the seat of Moses. Yet it was precisely during this time that the corruption was so great that their destruction was imminent.

Nearly all of God’s people agree that we are living in the end times. According to the apostle, these are perilous times, because people have a form of godliness but deny its power. They turn away from the truth and turn to fables. But who realizes that these things are actually happening in our times? And if someone lets the light shine, they demand love and cry out that we must not judge, because God is a God of love!

Who has an ear to hear all this hypocrisy that hides behind expression such as: “Under the blood,” “The finished work of Calvary is sufficient,” “Hallelujah, praise the Lord!”? And how many of those who can hear it, dare to speak out? Because if you do say something, you are accused of despising Jesus’ blood and the atonement. Thus people discover that it is best to remain silent and let the hypocrisy continue.

How many people do you suppose suffer because of all this lawlessness in the preaching of the promises without conditions, which extols the grace that is in Christ but keeps quiet about the necessity of obedience on our part? How many people do you suppose really understand how this lawlessness works to rob the blood of Jesus of its power? Read 2 Kings 17:9. “And the children of Israel hid the Lord their God with words that were not right . . .”[Norw. Trans.]. In this connection the description of the harlot in Revelation 17:1-2 is very apt: “And the inhabitants of the earth were made drunk with the wine of her fornication.” “For by your sorcery all the nations were deceived.” Rev. 18:23.

“Drunk” is the right word for the condition of God’s people today. Both their hearing and vision are clouded. They know that something is amiss, like drunkards often do, but they are at a loss to do anything about it. They cry out for power and blessing, for signs and wonders and revival; they cry out like the prophets of Baal did. Could it be that God has fallen asleep or that He is so poor that He has to ration His power and His Spirit?

If only God’s people could wake up to the new covenant in Jesus’ blood, wake up to the fact that this is the revival they need—a revival to the obedience of faith! This is the revival that is needed so that we can be baptized by one Spirit to be the body of Christ, and realize that we are called to obedience and works, and again to obedience and works. We need a revival to realize the fact that only they love Jesus who have His commandments and keep them. Then the Father will love them, and Jesus and the Father will make their abode with them. John 14:21-25. Then unity will be the automatic result, and the power of godliness will result in victory over sin and worldliness; and with their lives they will then be a witness of the same good confession that Jesus, Timothy, and all the saints down through the ages have made.

“Sorcery” is an apt expression for the deception of our day. Sorcery claims to dispense with natural laws and produce supernatural effects through spells and magic. Preachers by the thousands are trying to “charm” their listeners into heaven, without giving them God’s laws and commandments. “Jesus kept the law for us,” they say; “He went the way for us, in our stead, so that we would not have to.” But was Jesus resurrected for us, and did He go to heaven for us so that “we would not have to”?

God’s people are so bewitched that when they read the Scriptures they read nothing of the new covenant. They do not read what they see, and they do not see what is written; but they see and read what they have heard from the harlot, and they are always looking for “a good verse” as they say.

Pray to God that He might deliver you from this sorcery, and begin to read the Scriptures as if you had never read them before. Start noticing what is actually written. Then it will dawn on you that nearly everything you read is an exhortation to obey and to do. The Scriptures, from beginning to end, speak clearly of the new covenant.

Think if there could be a revival in these end times, a revival that would stir us up to follow Jesus on the narrow way of life; for if we do not follow Him on this way, we can never walk in the steps of the One who did no sin. 1 Pet. 2:21-24. May there be a revival that stirs our hearts to die with Him, that we might live with Him, so that all this sorcery—this deception—might be exposed before Jesus comes again. Then God’s people will be endued with power from on high as they were before, and their faith will once again become real and effectual. 2 Tim. 3:8. When our sufficiency is of God we are truly sufficient unto every good work and word.

This booklet will have achieved its purpose if it contributes toward bringing about such a revival. But even if revival does not come, God’s judgment on the harlot surely will come, and the cry will be heard, “Babylon is fallen, is fallen, that great city, because she has made all nations drink of the wine of the wrath of her fornication.” Rev. 14:8.

Just as it was said about the people in the old covenant upon whom God’s judgment fell, “But they have not obeyed Your voice or walked in Your law. They have done nothing of all that You commanded them to do; therefore You have caused all this calamity to come upon them.” Jer. 32:23. The same judgment will be passed on the people of the new covenant when destruction from God descends on them.

For you who read this booklet, may it be like a voice from heaven, crying, “Come out of her, my people, lest you share in her sins, and lest you receive of her plagues.” Rev.18:4.




Footnotes

	 	[1] The covering 	is the imputed righteousness of Jesus. Everyone wants this covering, but they 	cannot bear to hear about personal righteousness. James 2:21-24.



	 	[2] In Norway, this is the Evangelical Lutheran Church



	 	[3] A renowned Norwegian 	religious reformer who lived in the 19th century.





