The Grace that is in Christ Jesus





Sigurd Bratlie





License


	 		This e-Book is licensed to:



		Hans-Willem van der Waal

		jwh.vd.waal@filternet.nl

		Church: Rotterdam



		Downloaded from Brunstad Portal: 12/25/2015



		© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag





Colophon




The Grace that is in Christ Jesus





Sigurd Bratlie





		Translated from the Norwegian

		Original title: Nåden i Jesus Kristus

		First published in 1941



		English Edition: 8th edition 1991



		e-Book version: 2011 (revision: 20-7-2011)

		ISBN 978-82-8253-073-6 (ePub format)



© Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag

		P.O. Box 900

		3168 Melsomvik

		Norway



www.ssfnett.no

www.brunstad.org





For this edition the Revised Standard Version of the Bible has been used in the text. An occasional word or phrase from the Norwegian Bible translation of 1930 appears in brackets in place of (or in addition to) the Revised Standard Version wording to more accurately reflect what the author wrote.





Copyright and terms of use




Copyright



	© This material is protected by the copyright law. Reproduction and/or making the material publicly available, is prohibited without the prior written consent of Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc., P.O. Box 2846, Winnipeg, MB Canada R3C 4B4, if not as the result of invariable established law. Stiftelsen Skjulte Skatters Forlag, P.B. 900, Brunstad, N-3168 Melsomvik, Norway [including Hidden Treasure Literature Inc.]

	(See www.ssfnett.no and www.brunstad.org)





Terms of use



	This e-Book is licensed only for personal use and can thus not be resold or given to other persons. 	If you want to share this book with others, you can refer them to portal.brunstad.org. 	If you read this e-Book and not have your own personalized copy, you should go to portal.brunstad.org and download your own copy.



	Thank you for respecting these terms of use.





Grace


When people think about grace, they usually think about the forgiveness of sins; and since we have all sinned, we all need grace. For this reason, all who are burdened by their sin like to hear about grace. However, if we only think of grace in terms of forgiveness and hear that our sins are covered by grace, we will not be afraid of committing sin. This is the case with so many Christians; they have become as Jude writes in his epistle, verse 4, "Ungodly men, who turn the grace of our God into licentiousness."

Grace not only means forgiveness, it also means help. Heb. 4:16. Grace is not only given to forgive our sins, but also to teach us not to sin. Tit. 2:11-12. If we understand grace in this way, we will be rid of the false comfort which says, "Sinning is not really so serious, because grace is always available," and get that true comfort which says, "No matter how bound in sin I am now, I can receive sufficient grace to be completely delivered and have victory."





The Law


When most people think about the law, they think in terms of condemnation. This is the same misunderstanding as the one concerning grace. God did not give man the law merely to condemn him, but to instruct him and bring him to an acknowledgment of sin. By the instruction of the law many souls in the old covenant lived a praiseworthy life. But since they only had their own strength, no one was able to keep the entire law. The law did not lead to perfection. Heb. 7:19. All the God-fearing men of whom we read reached their limitations, and this brought the acknowledgment of sin. "For the law was given through Moses, but grace and truth came through Jesus Christ." John 1:17.





A Better Hope Introduced


Many people reason like this: "The law—condemnation—was given by Moses; however, through Christ we now have a better hope. He came with grace—forgiveness—and from now on God sees us through Jesus as if we had never sinned. Moses came with the requirements of the law, but Jesus removed these, since He fulfilled the law Himself so that we would not have to."

This reasoning is quite false. The better hope is quite obviously that now we can attain unto more than before. The weakness of the law was that it could not lead anyone to perfection. So the better hope must be that now we can become perfect. This is why the apostle wrote, "Let us go on to perfection." Heb. 6:1.

Paul said that he did only one thing, and that was to follow hard after perfection. Phil. 3:12. He didn't do this in ignorance; the knowledge of Christ had given him this hope, the knowledge of Him in whom God condemned sin in the flesh, thus doing what the law could not do because it was weak through the flesh. The intention was not that we should be released from the requirements of the law, but that these righteous requirements of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk according to the Spirit. Rom. 8:3-4.





Full of Grace and Truth


This false understanding of grace has the effect of doing away with the truth, so that we only receive "half" a Jesus, which is what Paul calls "another Jesus" and a "different gospel." 2 Cor. 11:4. "You may well put up with it." Grace without truth pleases people quite well. They gladly put up with this sort of preaching. There is a veritable flood of preachers in our land who travel around and minister this "different gospel" and preach "another Jesus." And because the people accept it gladly, many of them make a good living at it.

"For we are not, as so many, peddling the word of God . . . ." 2 Cor. 2:17. We want the truth as well as grace! It is no comfort for us to hear that grace is so great that even if we are in bondage to sin, we will get to heaven anyway. Our comfort is that God's grace is so great that we no longer have to be in bondage to sin; now we can overcome sin. This is heaven for us!

Jesus came full of grace and truth. That was His glory. John 1:14. Had He come with grace only and not with truth, it would have been like whitewashing a grave. We would have remained in our sin and ignorance while being covered with God's grace. Many have this understanding of grace, but no glory comes of it. They are just hypocrites. On the other hand, had Jesus come with the truth only, we would have seen our condition and come into condemnation and despair, because we are not competent of ourselves to live according to the truth. This doesn't lead to any glory either. But Jesus came with all that we need—grace and truth. Now we can see our true condition and the entire will of God for us, and we can receive all the help we need to live accordingly. Then comes the glory!

Jesus came full of grace and truth—in other words, nothing lacking. "Therefore He is also able to save to the uttermost those who come to God through Him . . . ." Heb. 7:25. This is the better hope by which we can draw near to God.

The law was a part of God's will, but Jesus came with all of God's will; that is, He came full of truth. He did not do away with the law, as many believe. No, He fulfilled it. We see this in the Sermon on the Mount. "You have heard that it was said . . . 'You shall not commit adultery.'" That was the law, which dealt with the act itself; the people could keep this law in their own strength. But it was not perfection. Then Jesus came with the truth—perfection: "But I say to you that whoever looks at a woman to lust for her has already committed adultery with her in his heart." Matt. 5:27-28. Here He condemns sin in the flesh. Rom. 8:3. This is perfection: Not only is the outside of the cup cleansed, but the inside as well.

It is not possible to overcome this lust in our own strength; we need God's power. That is why Jesus came with help. This was His theme throughout the entire Sermon on the Mount, and He says that He came to preach the gospel to the poor. The gospel is the glad tidings—the promises. The Sermon on the Mount is really the gospel; it is what God will do with every soul who surrenders himself to Him with all his heart. Jesus begins the Sermon on the Mount with the words, "Blessed are the poor in spirit . . . .

Blessed are those who mourn . . . . Blessed are those who hunger and thirst for righteousness . . . ." It is as if someone prepared a large table with the finest of food and said to those who were invited, "Blessed are you if you are hungry. Blessed are you who have mourned for so long because you have had no food. Blessed are you who are poor, for now there is full liberty to help yourselves."

There were many in Israel who longed for a life of perfection. They knew in their hearts that what the law could lead them to was insufficient. Now Jesus had come with perfection. He prepared a table before them with an abundance of food and said; "Blessed are those who hunger and thirst. The time has come; now you shall be filled with righteousness—satisfied with perfection. Now everyone is free to take as much as he likes." Now we can behold His glory, the glory as of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth.





Where Sin Abounds, Grace Abounds Much More


Many reason like this: "I am terrible; I sin in thought, word, and deed. But it doesn't really matter, because 'where sin abounded, grace abounded much more.'" Many also think they must continue in sin in order that grace might abound. Paul refutes this in Romans 6:1-2, where he writes: "What shall we say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? Certainly not! How shall we who died to sin live any longer in it?"

This line of thought does not produce any glory. If a man were a habitual thief, he would be under the condemnation of the law, and he would feel persecuted. Suppose, though, that he were to be freed from the law and were to come under grace; then he could steal as much as he liked, because "where sin abounded, grace abounded much more." The more he stole, the more grace would cover him. How terrible it would be if this were actually the case.

"Then what does it mean?" you ask. Let us keep to the illustration. If the man steals, he is under the law. The law can do no more than condemn and punish him so that, at the very most, he would not dare to do it again. But sin abounds. Stealing is a disease with him; he has kleptomania, inherited through many generations. No matter how severe his punishment might be, he cannot stop stealing. However, where sin abounds, grace—the help to free us from sin's power—is infinitely greater. If he seeks refuge in Jesus, he will receive grace—the power from heaven not only to stop stealing, but also to stop coveting his neighbor's goods.

"Obviously he must quit stealing," you say, "because one cannot steal and still be a Christian." Of course not! But it should be just as obvious that we must stop gossiping, backbiting, seeking our own, and lording it over others; we must stop being jealous, envious, offended, ill-tempered, etc. "Yes," you may reply, "but we can never be perfect; besides, these things are deeply rooted." True, they are. But where sin abounds—that is, where it is deeply rooted—grace (help to be freed from its power) is infinitely greater. It was not in his own strength that the man stopped stealing, but by the grace he received from Jesus. Is His grace not sufficient for us to put an end to all other things too? Or would you take away some of the glory with which Jesus came?





My Grace Is Sufficient for You


Paul had received great revelations, and lest he should be exalted above measure, He was also given a thorn in the flesh. He pleaded with the Lord to take it away but he received the reply, "My grace is sufficient for you, for My strength is made perfect in weakness." Paul's answer to this was, "Therefore most gladly I will rather boast in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me." 2 Cor. 12:1-10.

Many derive a false comfort from these words. They are aware of their sin and defeat, and in their weakness they say, "Even Paul had nothing to boast of except his infirmities, so it is good that God's grace is sufficient for us." According to this logic God's grace is sufficient, thus one does not need to live a God-fearing life. This would be to glory in one's sin. But that is not what Paul did. You must not think that the thorn in his flesh was some sin to which Paul was bound. On the contrary, its purpose was to keep Paul from sinning—to keep him from exalting himself. It was something that kept Paul in his place and helped him to realize that apart from God's grace, he was nothing. But he was not supposed to lack anything either; grace was to be sufficient for him. Grace was not meant to replace a God-fearing life, but to help him attain it, and in this grace he was supposed to lack anything. It was to be sufficient to meet all his needs.

You who are defeated by sin and liken it to the infirmity Paul writes about, have you ever thought that God's power was made perfect in him so that when he was weak, then he was strong? You can never say that when you are defeated (for example, when you lose your temper) God's power is perfected in you. That would be ridiculous! Neither can you say that you are weak when when you lose your temper. On the contrary, it is just then that you are strong! Woe unto anyone who gets in your way! It is not the power of God you are manifesting, but the power of the flesh.

Being weak is the opposite of being proud. To be humble is to have lowly thoughts about oneself. Then we will receive grace—that is, the power of God within us to conquer sin. Therefore it is necessary for God occasionally to permit things to happen to us that remind us of our wretchedness, which makes us dependent on Him. When God blesses us and lets our work succeed (for example, by giving us revelations), it is easy for us to become arrogant and believe that we are something special. But then God gives us a thorn in the flesh, such as a difficult situation, sickness or some such thing, which reminds us that we are dust and nothing at all without His grace. These things are a counterbalance to His blessings so that in spite of tremendous revelations, we are kept in our place, in an abiding acknowledgment of our utter weakness.

"Well," you say, "sooner or later everyone must face the fact that he falls short." Yes, but Paul had received the promise that grace—God's power—would be sufficient for him so that he would not need to fall short. In other words, God's grace was to be a storehouse from which he could draw. When he felt his infirmity—that his own strength and capabilities were insufficient—he did not need to lose courage, because the supply of grace from which he could draw was always sufficient so that he could complete his work, which was to do God's will in everything.





Grace to Help in Time of Need


Because we have a High Priest who "was in all points tempted as we are," we can come boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and "find grace to help in time of need." Heb. 4:1516.

We could ask the question, "When is the time of need?" You might answer, "After we have sinned." But if you say that, you show that you have a false understanding of grace. We read of "grace to help"; we don't need grace to help us to commit sin! "No," you say, "but we do need grace after we have sinned." Quite right, but is that the time of need? Is not the time of need the moment I am tempted, before I fall, so that I find help not to sin? "Impossible!" you say. But is grace not sufficient? Is Jesus unable to help us?

Let us illustrate this. A mountaineer, while climbing, slips and nearly falls over a steep precipice. He is just able to save himself from falling by hanging onto the ledge, but he does not have the strength to climb back onto the path. He hangs over the precipice, calling for help, but no one hears him. After a while, not being able to hold on any longer, he loses his grip and hurtles down the ravine. He could have been killed, but he survives, calling for help until rescuers comes. His rescuers help him and bring him to the hospital where, after a long stay, his health is restored. Now the question is, did he get help in time of need? "No," you reply. "He should have received help before he fell." Exactly! So it is with us. When we are tempted, we are like the man who was in danger of falling before he actually fell. We are not able to stand in our own strength when we meet temptation, thus we are exhorted to be bold and cry out for help. That is the time of need. If we do this we will find grace to help us so we do not fall. Or don't you believe that grace is equal to the task? Don't you believe it is sufficient for you? The mistake most people make is that they are not humble enough to confess their own weakness in the moment of temptation and call for help. The power of God is therefore not perfected in them, enabling them to stand; so they fall. And there they lie, as in our illustration, bruised and broken. Then they can acknowledge their weakness and call for help. They should also confess their self-righteousness and stubbornness in not having called for help before. They could have fallen to their death. Some have fallen so deeply into sin they are not able to bring themselves to draw near to God and seek forgiveness. Others, even though they have received forgiveness for their sins, have permanently marred their lives. Such people need a longer or shorter "stay in the hospital," as it were, depending on how seriously they take it. That is, it will take time before they can regain their boldness and joy in Christ—and then only if they are not superficial in their repentance.

Why can we come with boldness and pray for help? It is because we have a High Priest who was in all points tempted as we are (not in some other way), yet without falling. In all His trials and temptations He never committed sin. He was tested, yet He did not sin. He went through all this not only for His own sake, but in order that He might help us. Now He knows what it means to resist temptation steadfastly, and He is able to sympathize with our weaknesses. He knows what we need and understands how to help us in our time of need.

That is why we can have boldness. We do not need to draw back, fearing that we are not understood or that He doesn't have the power to help. He Himself stood the test and will also enable us to stand, to follow His steps—He who did not commit sin, etc. Sin does not have dominion over those who are under grace.

Now we can understand the scripture that says, "For sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace." Rom. 6:14. It is hardly surprising that those who are under the law fall in sin; after all, they only have their own strength. However, to sin when one is under grace is meaningless, because all God's power is at our disposal. 2 Pet. 1:3.





My Righteousness


"And be found in Him, not having my own righteousness, which is from the law, but that which is through faith in Christ, the righteousness which is from God by faith . . . ." Phil. 3:9.

There are many who understand this text like this: "My righteousness is nothing but sin and wretchedness—unacceptable to God. But I believe in Jesus, that He lived a righteous life for me and died for me; therefore, His righteousness is imputed to me even though I am ever so sinful and my deeds ever so bad. Therefore don't look at me, look at Jesus." This sounds right, but the spirit of it is wrong. It is not right according to the letter either, because Paul writes: Follow me, even as I follow Christ. 1 Cor. 11:1; 4:16; Phil. 3:17; 4:9.

The righteousness that is by the law can be called my righteousness, because I do it in my own strength. The only help the law can give me is to instruct me. Paul was a zealous man who achieved much in his own righteousness. However, the law did not lead anyone to perfection, and Paul realized that the righteousness he achieved by the law was inadequate. But now he had received the knowledge concerning Christ— concerning the grace that was given to mankind through Him. He began to admit his own weakness and began to believe in Christ—in the grace, the resurrection power that He alone could give. He knew that this was sufficient to lead him into perfect righteousness. We read later that he had no other interest than to pursue perfection. All else was loss to him. All gain according to the flesh was as dung in comparison to gaining the victor's crown. He ran hard in the race, and he exhorts us to consider him and follow him. We can safely do that, because he did not run with uncertainty, nor did he fight as one who beats the air. 1 Cor. 9:26. He knew in whom he believed.





The Righteousness of Faith


The law has nothing to do with faith, for "The man who does them shall live by them." Gal. 3:12. A man is not justified by the works of the law; works of faith are necessary. But we cannot come to these works until we have lost all confidence in ourselves; then the promise is ours. This is why the apostle uses Abraham as an example. We know that as long as Abraham had something in himself or in Sarah in which he could trust, he did not receive Isaac. He had to wait until they were both as good as dead. Then they were so weak that the power of God could be perfected in them; then they received what was promised. It was by faith, and his faith was imputed to him as righteousness. "There you are," you say. "He wasn't so righteous after all, because it was only imputed to him." In saying that, are you implying that Abraham was only to "reckon" that he had Isaac without actually having him? Is that what he did? In a sense it was, because when he received the promise, he believed. Even though he still did not have Isaac at that point (Gen. 15:1-6), he knew it was only a question of time, and the fact that he finally did receive Isaac was evidence that he believed. We see from this that imputed righteousness (justification) was not a "make-believe" righteousness. It signified that the promise was going to be personally fulfilled in Abraham. Therefore Isaac is the son of promise, the one whom Abraham actually received by faith when he had no more confidence in himself or Sarah. That is why it is called "the faith of Abraham," and those who have Abraham's faith are Abraham's children, and heirs of the promises.

We have received the promises through Jesus. He will avenge us of our adversary the devil. He will satisfy us with righteousness—with what is written in the Sermon on the Mount. You say "Impossible!" to that, because you are conscious of the inadequacy of your own strength and see your own wretchedness. What Abraham was promised was just as "impossible," but still he believed God, and it was reckoned to him as righteousness. "Then it must be reckoned to me as righteousness, too," you say. Do you mean without you living the Sermon on the Mount in deed and in truth? Without it actually being fulfilled in your life? If that is what you mean, then you do not have Abraham's faith, because what he believed was fulfilled in him. Most Christians, however, look at themselves and become weak in faith. But Abraham gave God the glory, and so must you! When you lose all confidence in yourself and believe that He who gave the promise is also mighty to perform it, then your faith will be reckoned to you as righteousness. Then you shall see God's glory, and it will only be a matter of time before it is fulfilled in you personally.

What we can achieve in our own strength is, at best, an "Ishmael." Our love, mercy, and goodness are so superficial. But that which we receive by faith is genuine truth; it is divine nature. 2 Pet. 1:4.





Set Free From the Law


"But now we have been delivered [set free] from the law, having died to what we were held by, so that we should serve in the newness of the Spirit and not in the oldness of the letter." Rom. 7:6. "Who Himself bore our sins in His own body on the tree, that we, having died to sins, might live for righteousness—by whose stripes you were healed." 1 Pet. 2:24.

There are two ways of being set free from the law. One is by abolishing it. Many people believe that this is what Jesus did, and that this is how we are "set free" from the law. But we have already seen that this is wrong. The other way to be set free from the law is by fulfilling the law. "That the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us who do not walk according to the flesh but according to the Spirit." Rom. 8:4.

Let us go back to the illustration of the thief. His desire is to be set free from the law concerning stealing. He is convicted by it and feels condemned. If the laws against stealing were to be abolished, he would feel happy and free. There are many who rejoice in being "set free" from the law like this. But the thief does not stop stealing, and most people do not finish with their bad temper, gossiping, covetousness, anxiety, vanity, etc. If in this condition they can still rejoice and be glad, then we understand that there is something fundamentally wrong with their attitude of mind.

We just read, "But now we have been delivered from the law, having died to what we were held by." The thief is in bondage to stealing, but when he dies to that which held him (in other words, when he stops stealing), he is set free from the law; he has no more trouble with it. On the contrary, the law is his friend and will be to his praise. He can justly rejoice and be glad. A noble-minded man cannot rejoice unless he is rid of his sin, and only a person with that kind of attitude meets the conditions for understanding the Scriptures correctly. All others twist them to their own destruction.

That is why Jesus died—not only that we might receive forgiveness, but also (as we read in the text) "that we, having died to sins, might live for righteousness." "For the death that He died, He died to sin once for all; but the life that He lives, He lives to God. Likewise you also, reckon yourselves to be dead indeed to sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus our Lord." Rom. 6:10-11.

Death to sin is called the death of Christ. It was Christ who first came with it. Paul said that he was "always carrying about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, hat the life of Jesus also may be manifested in our body." Read 2 Corinthians 4:10-11.

Instead of exerting himself to keep the law, Paul committed himself—his self-confidence, honor, desire for power, covetousness, anger, anxiety, etc., into the death of Christ so that the opposite—the life of Jesus—might be revealed in his mortal body. This he did continually because, by God's light, he continually saw more of himself. He died to sin and lived to righteousness. This is how he was set free from the law. Then the liberty we attain through death will be perfect. This is not a life in bondage; however, it is bondage to exert yourself, trying to keep the law according to the flesh.

"Now the works of the flesh are evident, which are: adultery, fornication, uncleanness, licentiousness, idolatry, sorcery, hatred, contentions, jealousies, outbursts of wrath, selfish ambitions, dissensions, heresies, envy, murders, drunkenness, revelries, and the like; of which I tell you beforehand, just as I also told you in time past, that those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God." Gal. 5:19-21. "Yes, but what if I pray for forgiveness?" you ask. Very well, but Paul's word holds true: those who practice such things will not inherit the kingdom of God. If you pray for forgiveness for something, you must also stop doing it! "But I can't," you reply. That is the very reason why you need to believe in Jesus; and if you have heard the gospel of Jesus, who came full of grace and truth, you are without excuse, whoever you may be.

"But the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, kindness, goodness, faithfulness, gentleness, self-control. Against such there is no law." Gal. 5:22-23. In other words, such people are set free from the law, and we understand that this is the right way in which to be set free.





The Chief of Sinners


"This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief." 1 Tim. 1:15.

This is a favorite verse of those who would pervert God's grace. They say that if Paul was the chief of sinners, how can they be expected to be any better? Many such people, including preachers, go around and comfort others with this attitude. They never tire of using that time-worn, popular sermon outline, which goes like this: When Paul began his ministry, he said he was the least of the apostles. 1 Cor. 15:9. After he had lived a life with God for some time, he said that he was less than the least of all the saints (Eph. 3:8). Toward the end of his life he said that he was the chief of sinners. Then they add, "It got worse with Paul, and it gets worse with us too; but how good it is that we have grace!"

Every upright soul will recognize that this is a false comfort, which agrees with neither the spirit nor the letter of the Scriptures. Hear what Paul said at the end of his life: "For I am already being poured out as a drink offering, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought the good fight, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith. Finally, there is laid up for me the crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous Judge, will give to me on that Day, and not to me only but also to all who have loved His appearing." 2 Tim. 4:6-8.

How different that is from "I am chief of sinners!" He said himself that the time of his departure was at hand. He knew that the crown of righteousness was laid up for him, not because God was so gracious that He would not reckon his sin to him, but because He is the righteous Judge who would award him he crown for having fought the good fight and for finishing the course.

"But," you say, "we can't disregard the scripture that says he was the chief among sinners." No, we shall not disregard it, but we shall read it in the light of what precedes it: "Although I was formerly a blasphemer, a persecutor, and an insolent man . . ."; and in another place, "For I am the least of the apostles, who am not worthy to be called an apostle, because I persecuted the church of God." That is why he calls himself chief of sinners.

Many will say, "But he writes that he is, not was—as if to prove that when Paul wrote his letter to Timothy he was the chief of sinners—a greater sinner than Timothy, whom he was exhorting! This is plainly unreasonable. Let us read it in context once again: "This is a faithful saying and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief." This tells us that of all the sinners whom Jesus came to save, he was the chief. He is writing about himself and other sinners such as they were when Jesus came to save them, not as they had become after living with Jesus for a time. Paul goes on to say, "However, for this reason I obtained mercy [grace], that in me first Jesus Christ might show all longsuffering, as a pattern to those who are going to believe on Him for everlasting life." 1 Tim. 1:16. He did not continue to be the chief of sinners but became an example in godly fear, and he exhorts Timothy to become such an example too. That is why Paul writes that this saying is sure and worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came to save sinners. These were not just empty phrases on Paul's part; he really meant it! The transformation that took place in his life is evidence of the reality of it.

When people hear about a holy life, many of them think of it as a life that was possible for Paul to live but impossible for them to live. But Paul, having declared himself to be the chief of sinners, dismisses all such reasoning. If Jesus was able to do such a great work in him, He can do it in anyone. Or has the gospel lost its power? Is it not a work of grace? Is His grace insufficient for us? Is it inadequate to save us? "Whoever desires, let him take the water of life freely." It is solely a question of our willingness.





Grace in Vain


"We then, as workers together with Him also plead with you not to receive the grace of God in vain." 2 Cor. 6:1. He who continues to do the works of the flesh has received God's grace in vain (see Galatians 5:19-21). "For the grace of God that brings salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in the present age . . . ." Tit. 2:11-12. If we do not come to a victorious life over sin, we have received God's grace in vain. "For the earth which drinks in the rain that often comes upon it, and bears herbs useful for those by whom it is cultivated, receives blessing from God; but if it bears thorns and briers, it is rejected and near to being cursed, whose end is to be burned." Heb. 6:7-8. It is the same with us. When we receive God's grace and yet continue to lose our temper, be dissatisfied, complain, lie, etc., then grace is in vain.

"But by the race of God I am what I am, and His grace toward me was not in vain; but I labored more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me." 1 Cor. 15:10. This shows us that grace leads to works—to action. To regard grace as a substitute for the work that I ought to do is to pervert the grace of our God into licentiousness.





Grace Shall Reign


"So that as sin reigned in death, even so grace might reign through righteousness to eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord." Rom. 5:21. Death is the fruit of sin; it reigns by the fruit of its work. We read of those who are dead in trespasses and sins, that they have deadened their consciences and that sin reigns over them. Just as sin reigns in death, grace shall reign through righteousness. Righteousness is the fruit of the work of grace, and by it, grace reigns. "For if by the one man's offense death reigned through the one, much more those who receive abundance of grace and of the gift of righteousness will reign in life through the One, Jesus Christ." Rom. 5:17.

We can see that the power of sin and death is active, and people are suffering as a result. The Fall is great; in fact, it is so great that very, very few ever come to faith in a complete recovery. Yet, should the Fall, which came by the first Adam, be greater than the salvation that is in Jesus Christ? Did He not say, "It is finished!" before He breathed His last? What was finished was complete deliverance from the Fall. Now we can live and reign all the more over sin and death, because we have received abundance of grace and the free gift of righteousness.

Those who do not believe in victory over sin do not believe that the work is finished either; they do not believe that the grace that is in Christ is sufficient. "And of His fullness we have all received, and grace for grace." John 1:16. We have received forgiveness for the time we lived without God under the dominion of sin. He nailed the handwriting of requirements that was against us to the cross. That is grace. And He has given us power to reign over sin in the time yet to come. That is grace for grace!





Perfect


Is it possible to be perfect? Just what does it mean to be perfect? We read that the sacrifices in the old covenant could not make the conscience of the worshiper perfect. It only dealt with foods, drinks, and various washings and ordinances, imposed until the time of reformation. Heb. 9:9-10.

Here we see the imperfection of the old offerings: they were not able to make people perfect according to the conscience; they served only as a reminder of sin. Heb. 10:3. However, with Christ came the time of reformation, of putting everything in order. Now we can become perfect according to the conscience. Our conscience is our understanding of good and evil. Therefore to be perfect means that a person has put everything in his life in order according to the understanding he has. Then he no longer has these continual reminders of sins.

Jesus calls us disciples (or apprentices). He says that if anyone would be His disciple, he must forsake everything, deny himself, take up his cross daily, and follow Him. A perfect apprentice is someone who gives up all his own opinions and plans and is obedient to his master. He must say, as Jesus did when He came into the world, "Behold, I have come . . . to do Your will, O God." Not for any other reason! Then he is a perfect disciple, although he is not yet perfected like the Master. When Paul says, "Not that I have already attained or am already perfected; but I press on" (Phil. 3:12), he means that he has not yet been perfected like his Master, but that he is pursuing it. Then in verse 15 he goes on to say, "Therefore let us, as many as are mature, have this mind." Here he means that they are perfect as apprentices. They had forsaken everything. There was nothing left to hinder them from entering into all that the Master had to teach them. They were here for the sole purpose of doing the will of Jesus, their Master. They had put everything in order according to the light they had and could say, "To the degree that we have already attained, let us continue in the same course" (Norwegian). Paul could not have said this to someone who was not perfect, to someone who had not forsaken everything, to someone who was still under the power of lying or backbiting, for example. It would be appalling if such a person were to "continue in the same course." However, to someone who had put everything in order according to the light of his conscience, he could say, "Continue in the same course as the Master gives you increasing light and revelation in your life."

When we speak about being perfect, we mean perfect according to our conscience as disciples—and this is possible! From that point we are to press on and be perfected. Jesus says, "It is enough for a disciple that he be like his teacher . . . ." Matt. 10:25. Nevertheless, until we are, we must be poor in spirit, and hunger and thirst.

Jesus' last words were that we should make disciples of all nations. It is comparatively easy to get people to pray to Jesus for the forgiveness of their sins, but to make disciples of them is hard work. To get them to forsake everything and teach them to observe all that He has commanded them is an enormous job.

Modern-day preachers have given up on this long ago, both for themselves and for the others. They are quite satisfied if they can bring people to kneel at the altar and get them enrolled as church members. And if they can get them to tithe, then they think that they have really accomplished something! But they consider it a hopeless task to bring people to the point of forsaking everything.

They could possibly count their so-called members by the thousands, but if they were to say, "Therefore let us, as many as are mature [perfect]", how many would there be left to count? When it concerns such a salvation, people do not really believe in the grace that is in Christ, despite the full assurance of Jesus' words: "All authority has been given to Me in heaven and on earth."

Yet, praise God, there are some who have seen His glory—the glory of the only begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth. And of His fullness we have all received: grace for grace.





